Evidence for a Forward Dynamics Model 
in Human Adaptive Motor Control 
Nikhil Bhushan and Reza Shadmehr 
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205 
Email: nbhushan@bme.jhu.edu, reza@bme.jhu.edu 
Abstract 
Based on computational principles, the concept of an internal 
model for adaptive control has been divided into a forward and an 
inverse model. However, there is as yet little evidence that learning 
control by the CNS is through adaptation of one or the other. Here 
we examine two adaptive control architectures, one based only on 
the inverse model and other based on a combination of forward and 
inverse models. We then show that for reaching movements of the 
hand in novel force fields, only the learning of the forward model 
results in key characteristics of performance that match the kine- 
matics of human subjects. In contrast, the adaptive control system 
that relies only on the inverse model fails to produce the kinematic 
patterns observed in the subjects, despite the fact that it is more 
stable. Our results provide evidence that learning control of novel 
dynamics is via formation of a forward model. 
I Introduction 
The concept of an internal model, a system for predicting behavior of a controlled 
process, is central to the current theories of motor control (Wolpert et al. 1995) and 
learning (Shadmehr and Mussa-Ivaldi 1994). Theoretical studies have proposed 
that internal models may be divided into two varieties: forward models, which 
simulate the causal flow of a process by predicting its state transition given a motor 
command, and inverse models, which estimate motor commands appropriate for a 
desired state transition (Miall and Wolpert, 1996). This classification is relevant for 
adaptive control because based on computational principles, it has been proposed 
that learning control of a nonlinear system might be facilitated if a forward model 
of the plant is learned initially, and then during an off-line period is used to train 
an inverse model (Jordan and Rumelhart, 1992). While there is no experimental 
evidence for this idea in the central nervous system, there is substantial evidence 
4 N. Bhushan and R. $hadrnehr 
that learning control of arm movements involves formation of an internal model. 
For example, practicing arm movements while holding a novel dynamical system 
initiates an adaptation process which results in the formation of an internal model: 
upon sudden removal of the force field, after-effects are observed which match the 
expected behavior of a system that has learned to predict and compensate for the 
dynamics of the imposed field (Shadmehr and Brashers-Krug, 1997). However, the 
computational nature of this internal model, whether it be a forward or an inverse 
model, or a combination of both, is not known. 
Here we use a computational approach to examine two adaptive control architec- 
tures: adaptive inverse model feedforward control and adaptive forward-inverse 
model feedback control. We show that the two systems predict different behaviors 
when applied to control of arm movements. While adaptation to a force field is 
possible with either approach, the second system with feedback control through an 
adaptive forward model, is far less stable and is accompanied with distinct kinematic 
signatures, termed "near path-discontinuities". We observe remarkably similar in- 
stability and near path-discontinuities in the kinematics of 16 subjects that learned 
force fields. This is behavioral evidence that learning control of novel dynamics is 
accomplished with an adaptive forward model of the system. 
2 Adaptive Control using Internal Models 
Adaptive control of a nonlinear system which has large sensory feedback delays, 
such as the human arm, can be accomplished by using two different internal model 
architectures. The first method uses only an adaptive inverse dynamics model to 
control the system (Shadmehr and Mussa-Ivaldi, 1994). The adaptive controller 
is feedforward in nature and ignores delayed feedback during the movement. The 
control system is stable because it relies on the equilibrium properties of the muscle 
and the spinal reflexes to correct for any deviations from the desired trajectory. 
The second method uses a rapidly adapting forward dynamics model and delayed 
sensory feedback in addition to an inverse dynamics model to control arm move- 
ments (Miall and Wolpert, 1996). In this case, the corrections to deviations from 
the desired trajectory are a result of a combination of supraspinal feedback as well 
as spinal/muscular feedback. Since the two methods rely on different internal model 
and feedback structures, they are expected to behave differently when the dynamics 
of the system are altered. 
The Mechanical Model of the Human Arm 
For the purpose of simulating arm movements with the two different control archi- 
tectures, a reasonably accurate model of the human arm is required. We model the 
arm as a two joint revolute arm attached to six muscles that act in pairs around 
the two joints. The three muscle pairs correspond to elbow joint, shoulder joint 
and two joint muscles and are assumed to have constant moment arms. Each mus- 
cle is modeled using a Hill parametric model with nonlinear stiffness and viscosity 
(Soechting and Flanders, 1997). The dynamics of the muscle can be represented by 
a nonlinear state function fM, such that, 
(1) 
where, Ft is the force developed by the muscle, N is the neural activation to the 
muscle, and x,, , are the muscle length and velocity. The passive dynamics 
related to the mechanics of the two-joint revolute arm can be represented by 
such that, 
 = fz>(T,x,.)= D-(x)[T-C(x,.). + J'F] (2) 
Evidence for a Forward Dynamics Model in Human Adaptive Motor Control 5 
where, / is the hand acceleration, T is the joint torque generated by the muscles, 
x,  are the hand position and velocity, D and C are the inertia and the coriolis 
matrices of the arm, J is the Jacobian for hand position and joint angle, and Fx is 
the external dynamic interaction force on the hand. 
Under the force field environment, the external force Fx acting on the hand is 
equal to B2, where B is a 2x2 rotational viscosity matrix. The effect of the force 
field is to push the hand perpendicular to the direction of movement with a force 
proportional to the speed of the hand. The overall forward plant dynamics of the 
arm is a combination of fM and fD and can be represented by the function fp, 
(a) 
Adaptive Inverse Model Feedforward Control 
The first control architecture uses a feedforward controller with only an adaptive 
inverse model. The inverse model computes the neural activation to the muscles 
for achieving a desired acceleration, velocity and position of the hand. It can be 
represented as the estimated inverse, f-l, of the forward plant dynamics, and maps 
the desired position xd, velocity 2d, and acceleration/a of the hand, into descending 
neural commands Nc. 
Nc = f-l(/a,xa,a) (4) 
Adaptation to novel external dynamics occurs by learning a new inverse model of the 
altered external environment. The error between desired and actual hand trajectory 
can be used for training the inverse model. When the inverse model is an exact 
inverse of the forward plant dynamics, the gain of the feedforward path is unity and 
the arm exactly tracks the desired trajectory. Deviations from the desired trajectory 
occur when the inverse model does not exactly model the external dynamics. Under 
that situation, the spinal reflex corrects for errors in desired (x,d, 2,a) and actual 
(x,, 2,) muscle state, by producing a corrective neural signal NR based on a linear 
feedback controller with constants K and K2. 
:vR = (xm - + - (5) 
Adaptive Forward-Inverse Model Feedback Control 
The second architecture provides feedback control of arm movements in addition 
to the feedforward control described above. Delays in feedback cause instability, 
therefore, the system relies on a forward model to generate updated state estimates 
of the arm. An estimated error in hand trajectory is given by the difference in 
desired and estimated state, and can be used by the brain to issue corrective neural 
signals to the muscles while a movement is being made. The forward model, written 
Desired 
Trajectory 
Od(t+60) 
,/ 
Inverse Arm 
Dynamics Model TLJd Inverse Muscle 
I '] Model f 
, fD 
i '-  Feedback 
[ ............................................. ................................................................... 
II, 
A = 90 ms 0d(t.30 ) 
ß Nc Muscle 
A = 60 rns"TR If M 
Spinal 
T; Dynamics 
fD 
Y 
fP Fx 
(external force 
0(t-30) A = 30 ms 
Figure 1' The adaptive inverse model feedforward control system. 
6 N. Bhushan and R. Shadrnehr 
Xd' Xd(ti[; X, i (t+0) 
I I Feedbao Ca,l 
Hand-to-joint 
state transform 
A = 90 ms 
Forward X(,_o). 
Model I.Nc(t-I 0) 4 (t+60) 
I' 
+ N 
Model 
fll fM 
Spinal 
Feedbac 
Z= 120 ms 
Arm 
Dynamics 
fD 
I Hand-to-joint 
F x state transform 
O(t-30) 
O(t.30 ) A = 30 ms 
Figure 2: A control system that provides feedback control with the use of a forward 
and an inverse model. 
as fp, mimics the forward dynamics of the plant and predicts hand acceleration 8, 
from neural signal No, and an estimate of hand state , 2. 
; ---- /p( Nc, ;, ; ) (6) 
Using this equation, one can solve for ,  at time t, when given the estimated state 
at some earlier time t-T, and the descending neural commds Nc from time t- w 
to t. If t is the current time and w is the time delay in the feedback loop, then sensory 
feedback gives the hand state x, 2 at t-w. The current estimate of the hand position 
and velocity can be computed by assuming initial conditions (t - )=x(t - w) and 
(t - w)=2(t - w), and then solving Eq. 6. For the simulations, w has vue of 200 
msec, and is composed of 120 msec feedback delay, 60 msec descending neural path 
delay, and 20 msec muscle activation delay. 
Based on the current state estimate and the estimated error in trajectory, the desired 
acceleration is corrected using a linear feedback controller with constants Kp and 
Kv. The inverse model maps the hand acceleration to appropriate neural signal 
for the muscles No. The spinal reflex provides additional corrective feedback N, 
when there is an error in the estimated and actual muscle state. 
new = d + c = d + Kp(Zd -- ) + Kv(d -- ) (7) 
NG = /;l(new,, ) (8) 
= - + 
When the forward model is an exact copy of the forward plant dynamics fp=fp, and 
the inverse model is correct f =f, the hand exactly tracks the desired trajectory. 
Errors due to an incorrect inverse model are corrected through the feedback loop. 
However, errors in the forward model cause deviations from the desired behavior 
and instability in the system due to inappropriate feedback action. 
3 Simulations results and comparison to human behavior 
To test the two control architectures, we compared simulations of arm movements 
for the two methods to experimental human results under a novel force field environ- 
ment. Sixteen human subjects were trained to make rapid point-to-point reaching 
Evidence for a Forward Dynamics Model in Human Adaptive Motor Control 7 
Inverse Model 
Feedforward Control 
(1) 
(2) 
\/ 
fl. 0.5 1 1.5 
(3) 
 0.3 
 0.2 
 0.1 
0 
'I' 0.5 1 1.5 
(4) 
tO 0  
0.5 sec 1 1.5 
(5) 
Typical Subject 
0.5 1 1.5 
0.3 
0.2 
01 
s si % s 4 
o 
0.5 sec 1 1 5 
81 
Forward-Inverse Model 
Feedback Control 
ß . ..... 
.... :, 
0.5 I 1.5 
0.$ 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
0.5 1 1.5 
20 
0 
0 0.5 SeC 1 1.5 
Figure 3: Performance in field B2 after a typical subject (middle column) and each of 
the controllers (left and right columns) had adapted to field B. (1) hand paths for 
8 movement directions, (2-5) hand velocity, speed, derivative of velocity direction, 
and segmented hand path for the -90 ø downward movement. The segmentation in 
hand trajectory that is observed in our subjects is almost precisely reproduced by 
the controller that uses a forward model. 
movements with their hand while an external force field, F - B, pushed on the 
hand. The task was to move the hand to a target position 10 cm away in 0.5 
sec. The movement could be directed in any of eight equally spaced directions. 
The subjects made straight-path minimum-jerk movements to the targets in the 
absence of any force fields. The subjects were initially trained in force field B 
with B-[0 13;-13 0], until they had completely adapted to this field and converged 
to the straight-path minimum-jerk movement observed before the force field was 
applied. Subsequently, the force field was switched to B2 with B=[0 -13;13 0] (the 
new field pushed anticlockwise, instead of clockwise), and the first three movements 
in each direction were used for data analysis. The movements of the subjects in 
field B2 showed huge deviations from the desired straight path behavior because 
the subjects expected clockwise force field B. The hand trajectories for the first 
movement in each of the eight directions are shown for a typical subject in Fig. 3 
(middle column). 
Simulations were performed for the two methods under the same conditions as 
the human experiment. The movements were made in force field B2, while the 
internal models were assumed to be adapted to field B. Complete adaptation 
to the force field B was found to occur for the two methods only when both 
8 N. Bhushan and R. Shadrnehr 
Inverse Experimental Forward 
[] Model J data from J Model 
(a) ]  16s, bj, c Cor, 
(b) 
(c) 
.,(ø) d,(m) L_(ø) t,_(s) .(ø) cj(m/s ) Ns 
Figure 4: The mean and standard deviation for segmentation parameters for each 
type of controller as compared to the data from our subjects. Parameters are 
defined in Fig. 3: /ki is angle about a seg. point, di is the distance to the i-th 
seg. point, ti is time to reach the i-th seg. point, cj is cumulative squared jerk 
for the entire movement, Ns is number of seg. point in the movement. Up until 
the first segmentation point (/k and d), behavior of the controllers are similar 
and both agree with the performance of our subjects. However, as the movement 
progresses, only the controller that utilizes a forward model continues to agree with 
the movement characteristics of the subjects. 
the inverse and forward models expected field B. Fig. 3 (left column) shows the 
simulation of the adaptive inverse model feedforward control for movements in field 
B2 with the inverse model incorrectly expecting B. Fig. 3 (right column) shows the 
simulation of the adaptive forward-inverse model feedback control for movements 
in field B2 with both the forward and the inverse model incorrectly expecting B. 
Simulations with the two methods show clear differences in stability and corrective 
behavior for all eight directions of movement. The simulations with the inverse 
model feedforward control seem to be stable, and converge to the target along a 
straight line after the initial deviation. The simulations with the forward-inverse 
model feedback control are more unstable and have a curious kinematic pattern 
with discontinuities in the hand path. This is especially marked for the downward 
movement. The subject's hand paths show the same kinematic pattern of near 
discontinuities and segmentation of movement as found with the forward-inverse 
model feedback control. 
To quantify the segmentation pattern in the hand path, we identified the "near 
path-discontinuities" as points on the trajectory where there was a sudden change 
in both the derivative of hand speed and the direction of hand velocity. The hand 
path was segmented on the basis of these near discontinuities. Based on the first 
three segments in the hand trajectory we defined the following parameters: , 
angle between the first segment and the straight path to the target; d, the distance 
covered during the first segment; 2, angle between the second segment and straight 
path to the target from the first segmentation point; t2, time duration of the second 
Evidence for a Forward Dynamics Model in Human Adaptive Motor Control 9 
segment; ha, angle between the second and third segments; Ns, the number of 
segmentation points in the movement. We also calculated the cumulative jerk Ca 
in the movements to get a measure of the instability in the system. 
The results of the movement segmentation are presented in Fig. 4 for 16 human sub- 
jects, 25 simulations of the inverse model and 20 simulations of the forward model 
control for three movement directions (a) -90 ø downward, (b) 90 ø upward and (c) 
135 ø upward. We performed the different simulations for the two methods by sys- 
tematically varying various model parameters over a reasonable physiological range. 
This was done because the parameters are only approximately known and also vary 
from subject to subject. The parameters of the second and third segment, as rep- 
resented by 2, t2 and ha, clearly show that the forward model feedback control 
performs very differently from inverse model feedforward control and the behavior 
of human subjects is very well predicted by the former. Furthermore, this charac- 
teristic behavior could be produced by the forward-inverse model feedback control 
only when the forward model expected field B. This could be accomplished only 
by adaptation of the forward model during initial practice in field B. This provides 
evidence for an adaptive forward model in the control of human arm movements in 
novel dynamic environments. 
We further tried to fit adaptation curves of simulated movement parameters (using 
forward-inverse model feedback control) to real data as subjects trained in field B. 
We found that the best fit was obtained for a rapidly adapting forward and inverse 
model (Bhushan and Shadmehr, 1999). This eliminated the possibility that the 
inverse model was trained offiine after practice. The data, however, suggested that 
during learning of a force field, the rate of learning of the forward model was faster 
than the inverse model. This finding could be paricularly relevant if it is proven 
that a forward model is easier to learn than an inverse model (Narendra, 1990), 
and could provide a computational rationale for the existence of forward model in 
adaptive motor control. 
References 
Bhushan N, Shadmehr R (1999) Computational architecture of the adaptive controller 
during learning of reaching movements in force fields. Biol Cybern, in press. 
Jordan MI, Flash T, Arnon Y (1994) A model of learning arm trajectories from spatial 
deviations Journal of Cog Neur 6:359-376. 
Jordan MI, Rumelhart DE (1992) Forward model: supervised learning with a distal 
teacher. Cog Sc 16:307-354. 
Miall RC, Wolpert DM (1996) Forward models for physiological motor control. Neural 
Networks 9:1265-1279. 
Narendra KS (1990) Identification and control of dynamical systems using neural networks. 
Neural Networks 1:4-27. 
Shadmehr R, Brashers-Krug T (1997) Functional stages in the formation of human long- 
term memory. J Neurosci 17:409-19. 
Shadmehr R, Mussa-Ivaldi FA (1994) Adaptive representation of dynamics during learning 
of a motor task. The Journal of Neuroscience 14:3208-3224. 
Soechting JF, Flanders M (1997) Evaluating an integrated musculoskeletal model of the 
human arm J Biomech Eng 9:93-102. 
Wolpert DM, Ghahramani Z, Jordan MI (1995) An internal model for sensorimotor inte- 
gration. Science 269:1880-82. 
