Modeling Surround Suppression in V1 Neurons 
with a Statistically-Derived Normalization Model 
Eero P. Simoncelli 
Center for Neural Science, and 
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences 
New York University 
eero.simoncelli@nyu.edu 
Odelia Schwartz 
Center for Neural Science 
New York University 
odelia@cns.nyu.edu 
Abstract 
We examine the statistics of natural monochromatic images decomposed 
using a multi-scale wavelet basis. Although the coefficients of this rep- 
resentation are nearly decorrelated, they exhibit important higher-order 
statistical dependencies that cannot be eliminated with purely linear pro- 
cessing. In particular, rectified coefficients corresponding to basis func- 
tions at neighboring spatial positions, orientations and scales are highly 
correlated. A method of removing these dependencies is to divide each 
coefficient by a weighted combination of its rectified neighbors. Sev- 
eral successful models of the steady-state behavior of neurons in primary 
visual cortex are based on such "divisive normalization" computations, 
and thus our analysis provides a theoretical justification for these models. 
Perhaps more importantly, the statistical measurements explicitly specify 
the weights that should be used in computing the normalization signal. 
We demonstrate that this weighting is qualitatively consistent with re- 
cent physiological experiments that characterize the suppressive effect 
of stimuli presented outside of the classical receptive field. Our obser- 
vations thus provide evidence for the hypothesis that early visual neural 
processing is well matched to these statistical properties of images. 
An appealing hypothesis for neural processing states that sensory systems develop in re- 
sponse to the statistical properties of the signals to which they are exposed [e.g., 1, 2]. 
This has led many researchers to look for a means of deriving a model of cortical process- 
ing purely from a statistical characterization of sensory signals. In particular, many such 
attempts are based on the notion that neural responses should be statistically independent. 
The pixels of digitized natural images are highly redundant, but one can always find a 
linear decomposition (i.e., principal component analysis) that eliminates second-order cot- 
Research supported by an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship to EPS, and by the Sloan Center for Theoretical 
Neurobiology at NYU. 
154 E. P Simoncelli and O. Schwartz 
relation. A number of researchers have used such concepts to derive linear receptive fields 
similar to those determined from physiological measurements [e.g., 16, 20]. The principal 
components decomposition is, however, not unique. Because of this, these early attempts 
required additional constraints, such as spatial locality and/or symmetry, in order to achieve 
functions approximating cortical receptive fields. 
More recently, a number of authors have shown that one may use higher-order statisti- 
cal measurements to uniquely constrain the choice of linear decomposition [e.g., 7, 9]. 
This is commonly known as independent components analysis. Vision researchers have 
demonstrated that the resulting basis functions are similar to cortical receptive fields, in 
that they are localized in spatial position, orientation and scale [e.g., 17, 3]. The associ- 
ated coefficients of such decompositions are (second-order) decorrelated, highly kurtotic, 
and generally more independent than principal components. 
But the response properties of neurons in primary visual cortex are not adequately described 
by linear processes. Even if one chooses to describe only the mean firing rate of such 
neurons, one must at a minimum include a rectifying, saturating nonlinearity. A number of 
authors have shown that a gain control mechanism, known as divisive normalization, can 
explain a wide variety of the nonlinear behaviors of these neurons [ 18, 4, 11, 12, 6]. In most 
instantiations of normalization, the response of each linear basis function is rectified (and 
typically squared) and then divided by a uniformly weighted sum of the rectified responses 
of all other neurons. Physiologically, this is hypothesized to occur via feedback shunting 
inhibitory mechanisms [e.g., 13, 5]. Ruderman and Bialek [19] have discussed divisive 
normalization as a means of increasing entropy. 
In this paper, we examine the joint statistics of coeff…cients of an orthonormal wavelet im- 
age decomposition that approximates the independent components of natural images. We 
show that the coefficients are second-order decorrelated, but not independent. In partic- 
ular, pairs of rectified responses are highly correlated. These pairwise dependencies may 
be eliminated by dividing each coefficient by a weighted combination of the rectified re- 
sponses of other neurons, with the weighting determined from image statistics. We show 
that the resulting model, with all parameters determined from the statistics of a set of im- 
ages, can account for recent physiological observations regarding suppression of cortical 
responses by stimuli presented outside the classical receptive field. These concepts have 
been previously presented in [21, 25]. 
1 Joint Statistics of Orthonormal Wavelet Coefficients 
Multi-scale linear transforms such as wavelets have become popular for image representa- 
tion. Typically, the basis functions of these representations are localized in spatial position, 
orientation, and spatial frequency (scale). The coefficients resulting from projection of 
natural images onto these functions are essentially uncorrelated. In addition, a number 
of authors have noted that wavelet coefficients have significantly non-Gaussian marginal 
statistics [e.g., 10, 14]. Because of these properties, we believe that wavelet bases provide 
a close approximation to the independent components decomposition for natural images. 
For the purposes of this paper, we utilize a typical separable decomposition, based on 
symmetric quadrature mirror filters taken from [23]. The decomposition is constructed by 
splitting an image into four subbands (lowpass, vertical, horizontal, diagonal), and then 
recursively splitting the lowpass subband. 
Despite the decorrelation properties of the wavelet decomposition, it is quite evident that 
wavelet coefficients are not statistically independent [26, 22]. Large-magnitude coefficients 
(either positive or negative) tend to lie along ridges with orientation matching that of the 
subband. Large-magnitude coefficients also tend to occur at the same relative spatial loca- 
tions in subbands at adjacent scales, and orientations. To make these statistical relationships 
Statistically Derived V1 Normalization Model 155 
1oo 
Other Neurons 
Figure 1: Illustration of image statistics as seen through two neighboring receptive fields. 
Left image: Joint conditional histogram of two linear coefficients. Pixel intensity corre- 
sponds to frequency of occurrence of a given pair of values, except that each column has 
been independently rescaled to fill the full intensity range. Right image: Joint histogram of 
divisively normalized coefficients (see text). 
more explicit, the left panel of Fig. 1 shows a conditional histogram of coefficients associ- 
ated with two neighboring receptive fields. Assuming stationarity, the statistics are gathered 
over all spatial positions of a single natural image. First, we see that the coefficients are 
well decorrelated: The expected value of the ordinate coefficient is approximately zero, 
independent of the value of the abscissa. But the variance of the ordinate clearly increases 
with the absolute value of the abscissa. 
We have observed this type of dependency in pairs of coefficients at neighboring spatial 
positions, orientations and scales, and for a wide variety of imagery. We have previ- 
ously used these relationships in applications of image compression, denoising, and syn- 
thesis [e.g., 22]. We have also shown that this dependency may be eliminated by dividing. 
Specifically, the squared coefficient, C 2 may be divided by a weighted sum of the neigh- 
boring squared coefficients plus a constant: 
The parameters {w } and o' are chosen to minimize squared prediction error: 
{, b} = axg min ú 
{,,} 
[ 
where the Pk are the values of coefficients at adjacent spatial positions, orientations and 
scales, and E[.] indicates expected value (computed by integrating over the full spatial 
156 E. P. Simoncelli and O. Schwartz 
lOO Model 
ﬂ 
o 
o.o o. 1 0.3 o.o o. 1 0.3 1 
Center corrat Ceoter contrast 
Figure 2: Response vs. center contrast, in the presence of a parallel surround stimulus of 
varying contrast. Physiological data from [8]. 
lOO 
O. 1 0.3 1 
Center contrast 
Model 
0.O0 O. 1 0.3 1 
Center contrat 
Surround contrast 
mO 
ﬂ 0.13 
ﬂ 0.5 
Figure 3: Response vs. center contrast in the presence of a perpendicular surround stimulus. 
Physiological data from [8]. 
extent of a set of images). A joint histogram of the square roots of two normalized coef- 
ficients is shown in the rightmost panel of Fig. 1, indicating that the resulting normalized 
components are nearly independent. 
2 Physiological Comparisons 
In this section, we examine predictions of the normalization model with weights determined 
from image statistics. The ability of normalization models to account for non-specific 
suppression within the classical receptive field has been documented [e.g., 12, 6]. Here we 
consider the influence of stimuli presented outside of the classical receptive field. 
We examine electrophysiological data obtained from recordings of simple cells in area 
V1 of an anesthetized Macaque monkey in two different labs [8, 15]. In each example, 
an optimal drifting sinusoidal grating is presented in the classical receptive field of the 
neuron. Simultaneously, another drifting sine grating is presented in a large annular region 
surrounding the classical receptive field. Each experiment examines the effect of varying 
one parameter of the surround stimulus on the mean firing rate of the neuron. 
For comparison, we show the normalized response, R, of a vertical basis function at the 
second recursion level of a wavelet pyramid, as specified by Eq. (1). Responses are av- 
eraged over all phases of the sinusoidal input, and scaled by a fixed constant a to pro- 
duce response levels comparable to physiological responses. The normalization signal is 
a weighted combination of squared coefficients at two scales, all three orientations, and a 
spatial neighborhood of diameter 65 pixels (roughly 7 receptive fields). The normalization 
weights are optimized for the statistics of a set of three 512 x 512 images ("Goldhill", 
Statistically Derived l/1 Normalization Model 157 
6O 
: 50 
3O 
10 
Cell Model 
- 50 0 50 - 50 0 50 
Relative Surround Orientation Relative Surround Orientabn 
Figure 4: Response as a function of surround orientation. Physiological data from [8]. 
Figure 5: 
from [15]. 
Cell Model 
0.5 I 1.5 2 0.5 I 1.5 2 
Relative Surround Spatial Frequency Relative Surround Spatial Frequency 
Response as a function of surround spatial frequency. 
Physiological data 
"Boats", and "Lena"). 
The first two examples (Figs. 2 and 3) show response as a function of center stimulus 
contrast. Each curve corresponds to a different surround contrast. The physiological data 
are fit with a function of the form R(c) = ocP/(c p + cp). The model curves are less 
steep than those of the neurons, since the model uses a fixed exponent of two. As sur- 
round contrast increases, the entire curve shifts to the right (on a log scale), indicative of 
divisive suppression. The parallel surround stimulus produces a significantly larger shift 
than the perpendicular surround. In the model, this behavior is a direct consequence of the 
statistically-chosen normalization weights. 
Figure 4 summarizes the suppressive effect of the surround (at the highest contrast) as a 
Cell Model 
Annulus inner diameter (dog) Annulus inner diameter (RF diameters) 
Figure 6: Response as a function of surround inner diameter. Physiological data from [8]. 
158 E. P Simoncelli and O. Schwartz 
function of orientation. Figure 5 shows a similar behavior with respect to surround spatial 
frequency. The largest suppression is observed when the surround spatial frequency is the 
same as the center (i.e., the preferred spatial frequency of the cell). Figure 6 shows the 
effect of spatial proximity. As the surround stimulus is moved away from the receptive 
field, the suppressive effect is reduced. 
3 Conclusions 
We have presented a weighted normalization model for early visual processing. Both the 
form and the parameters of the model are specified by statistical measurements from natural 
images. Although the comparisons we have presented are somewhat anecdotal, we find the 
ability of this model to mimic physiological suppression behaviors quite remarkable. 
Nevertheless, there are many tough issues to be resolved. Some of these are statistical. A 
fundamental question is whether statistical independence is a reasonable goal for neural 
processing. Additionally, one might ask if there is a statistical justification for cascaded 
sequences of normalization computations, as has been proposed in some models of cortical 
processing [e.g., 24]. More practically, the normalization procedure needs to be exam- 
ined in the context of a proper independent components basis. The orthonormal wavelet 
approximation that we have used here has the disadvantage that the diagonal bands contain 
a mixture of orientations. Preliminary tests indicate substitution of a better basis produces 
qualitatively similar results. 
An essential feature that is missing from our description is time. In particular, our normal- 
ization computation is simultaneous and instantaneous, and we have only modeled steady- 
state firing rates. A more realistic implementation would involve normalization of a pop- 
ulation of neurons in parallel using feedback or lateral connections (necessarily delayed), 
and would thus introduce temporal dynamics as well as higher-order effects such as dis- 
inhibition. Furthermore, our modeling and implementation are based on still images and 
static receptive fields. This should be augmented to include spatio-temporal behaviors such 
as direction-selectivity: we suspect that these properties may be derived from statistics of 
image sequences. 
Finally, an interesting issue is the plasticity of the normalization weights: Are these fixed 
(i.e., globally optimized over all images), or are they modified according to the statistics of 
the recent visual context? Our preliminary investigations indicate that such plasticity may 
account for adaptation effects that have been observed physiologically. 
References 
[1] F Attneave. Some informational aspects of visual perception. Psych. Rev., 61:183- 
193, 1954. 
[2] H B Barlow. Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory messages. 
In W A Rosenblith, editor, Sensory Communication, page 217. MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, MA, 1961. 
[3] A $ Bell and T $ Sejnowski. The 'independent components' of natural scenes are edge 
filters. Vision Research, 37(23):3327-3338, 1997. 
[4] A B Bonds. Role of inhibition in the specification of orientation selectivity of cells in 
the cat striate cortex. Visual Neuroscience, 2:41-55, 1989. 
[5] M Carandini and D J Heeger. Summation and division by neurons in primate visual 
cortex. Science, 264:1333-1336, 1994. 
[6] M Carandini, D $ Heeger, and $ A Movshon. Linearity and normalization in simple 
cells of the macaque primary visual cortex. J. Neuroscience, 17:8621-8644, 1997. 
Statistically Derived V1 Normalization Model 159 
[7] 
[8] 
[9] 
[10] 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
[14] 
[15] 
[16] 
[17] 
[18] 
[19] 
[20] 
[21] 
[22] 
[23] 
[24] 
[25] 
[26] 
J F Cardoso. Source separation using higer order moments. In ICASSP, pages 2109- 
2112, 1989. 
J R Cavanaugh, W Bair, and J A Movshon. Orientation-selective setting of contrast 
gain by the surrounds of macaque striate cortex neurons. In Neurosci Abstracts, vol- 
ume 23, page 227.2, 1997. 
P Common. Independent component analysis, a new concept? Signal Process., 
36:387-314, 1994. 
D J Field. Relations between the statistics of natural images and the response proper- 
ties of cortical cells. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 4(12):2379-2394, 1987. 
W S Geisler and D G Albrecht. Cortical neurons: Isolation of contrast gain control. 
Vision Research, 8:1409-1410, 1992. 
D J Heeger. Normalization of cell responses in cat striate cortex. Visual Neuroscience, 
9:181-198, 1992. 
D J Heeger. Modeling simple cell direction selectivity with normalized, half-squared, 
linear operators. J. Neurophysiology, 70(5): 1885-1898, 1993. 
S G Mallat. A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: The wavelet repre- 
sentation. IEEE Pat. Anal. Mach. Intell., 11:674-693, July 1989. 
J Miiller, J Krauskopf, and P Lennie, 1998. Center for Visual Science, University of 
Rochester. Unpublished data. 
E Oja. A simplified neuron model as a principal component analyzer. J. Mathematical 
Biology, 15:267-273, 1982. 
B A Olshausen and D J Field. Natural image statistics and efficient coding. Network: 
Computation in Neural Systems, 7:333-339, 1996. 
W Reichhardt and T Poggio. Figure-ground discrimination by relative movement in 
the visual system of the fly. Biol. Cybern., 35:81-100, 1979. 
D L Ruderman and W Bialek. Statistics of natural images: Scaling in the woods. 
Phys Rev. Letters, 73(6), 1994. 
T D Sanger. Optimal unsupervised learning in a single-layer linear feedforward neural 
network. NeuralNetworks, 2:459-473, 1989. 
E P Simoncelli. Normalized component analysis and the statistics of natural scenes. 
In Natural Scene Statistics Meeting, Hancock, MA, September 11-14 1997. 
E P Simoncelli. Statistical models for images: Compression, restora- 
tion and synthesis. In 31st Asilomar Conf Signals, Systems and Com- 
puters, pages 673-678, Pacific Grove, CA, November 1997. Available from 
http://www. cns.nyu.edu/,-eero/publications.html 
E P Simoncelli and E H Adelson. Subband transforms. In John W Woods, editor, 
Subband Image Coding, chapter 4, pages 143-192. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Norwell, MA, 1990. 
E P Simoncelli and D J Heeger. A model of neuronal responses in visual area MT. 
Vision Research, 38(5):743-761, 1998. 
E P Simoncelli and O Schwartz. Derivation of a cortical normalization model from 
the statistics of natural images. In Investigative Opthalmology and Visual Science 
Supplement (ARVO), volume 39, pages S-424, May 1998. 
B Wegmann and C Zetzsche. Statistical dependence between orientation filter outputs 
used in an human vision based image code. In Proc SPIE Visual Comm. and Image 
Processing, volume 1360, pages 909-922, Lausanne, Switzerland, 1990. 
Acknowledgement: Special thanks to James Cavanaugh and James Miiller for providing physiolog- 
ical data shown in this paper. 
