Fisher Scoring and a Mixture of Modes 
Approach for Approximate Inference and 
Learning in Nonlinear State Space Models 
Thomas Briegel and Volker Tresp 
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology 
Dept. Information and Communications 
Otto-Hahn-Ring 6, 81730 Munich, Germany 
{Thomas.Briegel, Volker. Tresp} @mchp.siemens.de 
Abstract 
We present Monte-Carlo generalized EM equations for learning in non- 
linear state space models. The difficulties lie in the Monte-Carlo E-step 
which consists of sampling from the posterior distribution of the hidden 
variables given the observations. The new idea presented in this paper is 
to generate samples from a Gaussian approximation to the true posterior 
from which it is easy to obtain independent samples. The parameters of 
the Gaussian approximation are either derived from the extended Kalman 
filter or the Fisher scoring algorithm. In case the posterior density is mul- 
timodal we propose to approximate the posterior by a sum of Gaussians 
(mixture of modes approach). We show that sampling from the approxi- 
mate posterior densities obtained by the above algorithms leads to better 
models than using point estimates for the hidden states. In our exper- 
iment, the Fisher scoring algorithm obtained a better approximation of 
the posterior mode than the EKF. For a multimodal distribution, the mix- 
ture of modes approach gave superior results. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Nonlinear state space models (NSSM) are a general framework for representing nonlinear 
time series. In particular, any NARMAX model (nonlinear auto-regressive moving average 
model with external inputs) can be translated into an equivalent NSSM. Mathematically, a 
NSSM is described by the system equation 
:rt -- fw(:rt-, ut) --I- et (1) 
where xt denotes a hidden state variable, et denotes zero-mean uncorrelated Gaussian noise 
with covariance Qt and ut is an exogenous (deterministic) input vector. The time-series 
measurements yt are related to the unobserved hidden states xt through the observation 
equation 
yt = gv(xt, ut) + vt (2) 
where vt is uncorrelated Gaussian noise with covariance Vt. In the following we assume 
that the nonlinear mappings fw (.) and gv (.) are neural networks with weight vectors w 
and v, respectively. The initial state x0 is assumed to be Gaussian distributed with mean 
ao and covariance Qo. All variables are in general multidimensional. The two challenges 
404 T. Briegel and V. Tresp 
in NSSMs are the interrelated tasks of inference and learning. In inference we try to es- 
timate the states of unknown variables :rs given some measurements//, ...,//t (typically 
the states of past (s < t), present (s - t) or future (s > t) values ofxt) and in learning we 
want to adapt some unknown parameters in the model (i.e. neural network weight vectors 
w and v) given a set of measurementsfi In the special case of linear state space models 
with Gaussian noise, efficient algorithms for inference and maximum likelihood learning 
exist. The latter can be implemented using EM update equations in which the E-step is 
implemented using forward-backward Kalman filtering (Shumway & Stoffer, 1982). If 
the system is nonlinear, however, the problem of inference and learning leads to complex 
integrals which are usually considered intractable (Anderson & Moore, 1979). A useful 
approximation is presented in section 3 where we show how the learning equations for 
NSSMs can be implemented using two steps which are repeated until convergence. First in 
the (Monte-Carlo) E-step, random samples are generated from the unknown variables (e.g. 
the hidden variables xt) given the measurements. In the second step (a generalized M-step) 
those samples are treated as real data and are used to adapt fw (.) and #v(.) using some 
version of the backpropagation algorithm. The problem lies in the first step, since it is dif- 
ficult to generate independent samples from a general multidimensional distribution. Since 
it is difficult to generate samples from the proper distribution the next best thing might be 
to generate samples using an approximation to the proper distribution which is the idea 
pursued in this paper. The first thing which might come to mind is to approximate the 
posterior distribution of the hidden variables by a multidimensional Gaussian distribution 
since generating samples from such a distribution is simple. In the first approach we use the 
extended Kalman filter and smoother to obtain mode and covariance of this Gaussian? Al- 
ternatively, we estimate the mode and the covariance of the posterior distribution using an 
efficient implementation of Fisher scoring derived by Fahrmeir and Kaufmann (1991) and 
use those as parameters of the Gaussian. In some cases the approximation of the posterior 
mode by a single Gaussian might be considered too crude. Therefore, as a third solution, 
we approximate the posterior distribution by a sum of Gaussians (mixture of modes ap- 
proach). Modes and covariances of those Gaussians are obtained using the Fisher scoring 
algorithm. The weights of the Gaussians are derived from the likelihood of the observed 
data given the individual Gaussian. In the following section we derive the gradient of the 
log-likelihood with respect to the weights in fw (.) and #v (.). In section 3, we show that 
the network weights can be updated using a Monte-Carlo E-step and a generalized M-step. 
Furthermore, we derive the different Gaussian approximations to the posterior distribution 
and introduce the mixture of modes approach. In section 4 we validate our algorithms using 
a standard nonlinear stochastic time-series model. In section 5 we present conclusions. 
2 THE GRADIENTS FOR NONLINEAR STATE SPACE MODELS 
Given our assumptions we can write the joint probability of the complete data for t -- 
1,..., T as 3 
p( xr , ¾r , ur ) = 
(3) 
 In this paper we focus on the case s _< t (smoothing and offline learning, respectively). 
2Independently from our work, a single Gaussian approximation to the E-step using the EKFS 
has been proposed by Ghahramani & Roweis (1998) for the special case of a RBF network. They 
show that one obtains a closed form M-step when just adapting the linear parameters by holding 
the nonlinear parameters fixed. Although avoiding sampling, the computational load of their M-step 
seems to be significant. 
aIn the following, each probability density is conditioned on the current model. For notational 
convenience, we do not indicate this fact explicitly. 
Fisher Scoring and Mixture of Modes for Inference and Learning in NSSM 405 
where UT = {ui,..., u-} is a set of known inputs which means that p(UT) is irrelevant 
in the following. Since only YT = {Yl,. -., YT} and UT are observed, the log-likelihood 
of the model is 
log 
with X, : 
gradients of 
respectively 
0 log L 
Ow 
log L 
Ov 
L: log f f (4) 
{x0, ..., xy}. By inserting the Gaussian noise assumptions we obtain the 
the log-likelihood with respect to the neural network weight vectors w and v, 
(Tresp & Hofmann, 1995) 
T 
ff Ofw(Xt-l,t) (Xt- fw(Xt-l,t))p(xt,Xt-llVT CT)dXt-ld2t 
t=l 0W  
T 
 f Og(xt, ut) (Yt--g(xt, ut))p(xt[YT UT)dxt. (5) 
t=l OV  
3 APPROXIMATIONS TO THE E-STEP 
3.1 Monte-Carlo Generalized EM Learning 
The integrals in the previous equations can be solved using Monte-Carlo integration which 
leads to the following learning algorithm. 
1. Generate $ samples {/:), }s from p(XT IYT, UT) assuming the current 
ß ß '  s=l 
model is correct (Monte-Carlo E-Step). 
0 1ogL and v new -- 
2. Treat those samples as real data and update w new : w øld q- ] Ow 
alog with stepsize and 
v øld + r/ Ov 
01ogL 1 T S Ofw(Xt_l, ltt 
tl s1 
OlogL 1 T S 
Ov 
t=l 
(generalized M-step). Go back to step one. 
(i:- fw(i:_,ut)) (6) 
=&7_ 
(Yt-g(&,ut)) 
(7) 
The second step is simply a stochastic gradient step. The computational difficulties lie 
in the first step. Methods which produce samples from multivariate distributions such as 
Gibbs sampling and other Markov chain Monte-Carlo methods have (at least) two prob- 
lems. First, the sampling process has to "forget" its initial condition which means that the 
first samples have to be discarded and there are no simple analytical tools available to de- 
termine how many samples must be discarded. Secondly, subsequent samples are highly 
correlated which means that many samples have to be generated before a sufficient amount 
of independent samples is available. Since it is so difficult to sample from the correct 
posterior distribution p(XT IYT, UT) the idea in this paper is to generate samples from an 
approximate distribution from which it is easy to draw samples. In the next sections we 
present approximations using a multivariate Gaussian and a mixture of Gaussians. 
3.2 Approximate Mode Estimation Using the Extended Kalman Filter 
Whereas the Kalman filter is an optimal state estimator for linear state space models the 
extended Kalman filter is a suboptimal state estimator for NSSMs based on local lineariza- 
tions of the nonlinearities. 4 The extended Kalmanfilter and smoother (EKFS) algorithm is 
4 Note that we do not include the parameters in the NSSM as additional states to be estimated as 
done by other authors, e.g. Puskorius & Feldkamp (1994). 
406 T. Briegel and V. Tresp 
a forward-backward algorithm and can be derived as an approximation to posterior mode 
estimation for Gaussian error sequences (Sage & Melsa, 1971). Its application to our frame- 
work amounts to approximating :c[ nøae  /:t :¾s where/:t :¾s is the smoothed estimate 
of :ct obtained from forward-backward extended Kalman filtering over the set of measure- 
ments YT and :c øae is the mode of the posterior distribution p(:tlYr, Ur). We use S:t 
as the center of the approximating Gaussian. The EKFS also provides an estimate of the 
error covariance of the state vector at each time step ! which can be used to form the covari- 
ance matrix of the approximating Gaussian. The EKFS equations can be found in Anderson 
& Moore (1979). To generate samples we recursively apply the following algorithm. Given 
/: _ 1 is a s ample from the Gau ssi an approximation of p (c t -  I Y T, UT) at time t -- 1 draw 
a sample /:5 from P(Ctlt-1 -" .s , . 
t-i, YT UT) The last conditional density is Gaussian 
with mean and covariance calculated from the EKFS approximation and the lag-one error 
covariances derived in Shumway & Stoffer (1982), respectively. 
3.3 Exact Mode Estimation Using the Fisher Scoring Algorithm 
If the system is highly nonlinear, however, the EKFS can perform badly in finding the 
posterior mode due to the fact that it uses a first order Taylor series expansion of the non- 
linearities fw (.) and #v (.) (for an illustration, see Figure 1 ). A uscful- and computationally 
tractable - alternative to the EKFS is to compute the "exact" posterior mode by maximizing 
1ogp(XT [YT, UT) with respect to XT. A suitable way to determine a stationary point of 
the log posterior, or equivalently, of p(XT, YrlUT) (derived from (3) by dropping p(UT)) 
¾FS,old 
is to apply Fisher scoring. With the current estimate 'T we get a better estimate 
xFS,new _ XTFS,old 'Jr- r] t for the unknown state sequence XT where  is the solution of 
T -- 
FS,old  ,FS,old  
$(x r ) = sta r (8) 
with the score function s(X,) = Ologp(XT,YTIUr) and the expected information matrix 
OXT 
,-q(XT)- E[ -ø2ø$p(Xr'YrlUT) . 
oxrox ]  By extending the arguments given in Fahrmeir & 
Kaufmann (1991) to nonlinear state space models it turns out that solving equation (8) - 
e.g. to compute the inverse of the expected information matrix - can be performed by 
Cholesky decomposition in one forward and backward passfi The forward-backward steps 
can be implemented as a fast EKFS-like algorithm which has to be iterated to obtain the 
maximum posterior estimates :c øae -/:t s (see Appendix). Figure 1 shows the estimate 
obtained by the Fisher scoring procedure for a bimodal posterior density. Fisher scoring 
is successful in finding the "exact" mode, the EKFS algorithm is not. Samples of the 
approximating Gaussian are generated in the same way as in the last section. 
3.4 The Mixture of Modes Approach 
The previous two approaches to posterior mode smoothing can be viewed as single Gaus- 
sian approximations of the mode of p(XTIYT, UT). In some cases the approximation of 
the posterior density by a single Gaussian might be considered too crude, in particular if 
the posterior distribution is multimodal. In this section we approximate the posterior by a 
weighted sum of m Gaussians p(XT[YT, UT)  km__l ap(XTI k) where p(XTlk) is the 
k-th Gaussian. If the individual Gaussians model the different modes we are able to model 
multimodal posterior distributions accurately. The approximations of the individual modes 
are local maxima of the Fisher scoring algorithm which are f9und by starting the algorithm 
using different initial conditions. Given the different Gaussians, the optimal weighting fac- 
tors are a  = p(Yr[k)p(k)/p(YT) where p(YT[k) = fp(YrlXr)p(Xrll)dXr is the 
*Note that the difference Ietween the Fisher scoring and the Gauss-Newton update is that in the 
former we take the expectation of the information matrix. 
OThe expected information matrix is a positive definite block-tridiagonal matrix. 
Fisher Scoring and Mixture of Modes for Inference and Learning in NSSM 407 
likelihood of the data given mode k. If we approximate that integral by inserting the Fisher 
scoring solutions/:t s'' for each time step t and linearize the nonlinearity #v (.) about the 
Fisher scoring solutions, we obtain a closed form solution for computing the a ' (see Ap- 
pendix). The resulting estimator is a weighted sum of the m single Fisher scoring estimates 
?M __ Ekm__l OktFS,k. The mixture of modes algorithm can be found in the Appendix. 
For the learning task samples of the mixture of Gaussians are based on samples of each of 
the m single Gaussians which are obtained the same way as in subsection 3.2. 
4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In the first experiment we want to test how well the different approaches can approximate 
the posterior distribution of a nonlinear time series (inference). As a time-series model we 
chose 
Xt--1 q- 8COS(1.2(t-- 1)), g(xt) = 21----Xt 2 (9) 
f(xt-1, ttt) -- 0.5Xt-1 q- 251 q- Xt2_l 0 ' 
the covariances Qt = 10, Vt - 1 and initial conditions ao = 0 and Qo = 5 which is 
considered a hard inference problem (Kitagawa, 1987). At each time step we calculate the 
expected value of the hidden variables xt, t = 1, ..., 400 based on a set of measurements 
Y4oo = {yx, ..., y400} (which is the optimal estimator in the mean squared sense) and based 
on the different approximations presented in the last section. Note that for the single mode 
approximation, X[ nøde is the best estimate of xt based on the approximating Gaussian. For 
the mixture of modes approach, the best estimate is Et,__  a t'/:t vs't' where/:t vs't' is the mode 
of the k-th Gaussian in the dimension of xt. Figure 2 (left) shows the mean squared error 
(MSE) of the smoothed estimates using the different approaches. The Fisher scoring (FS) 
algorithm is significantly better than the EKFS approach. In this experiment, the mixture of 
modes (MM) approach is significantly better than both the EKFS and Fisher scoring. The 
reason is that the posterior probability is multimodal as shown in Figure 1. 
In the second experiment we used the same time-series model and trained a neural net- 
work to approximate fw (.) where all covariances were assumed to be fixed and known. 
For adaptation we used the learning rules of section 3 using the various approximations 
to the posterior distribution of XT. Figure 2 (right) shows the results. The experiments 
show that truly sampling from the approximating Gaussians gives significantly better re- 
sults than using the expected value as a point estimate. Furthermore, using the mixture 
of modes approach in conjunction with sampling gave significantly better results than the 
approximations using a single Gaussian. When used for inference, the network trained us- 
ing the mixture of modes approach was not significantly worse than the true model (5% 
significance level, based on 20 experiments). 
5 CONCLUSIONS 
In our paper we presented novel approaches for inference and learning in NSSMs. The 
application of Fisher scoring and the mixture of modes approach to nonlinear models as 
presented in our paper is new. Also the idea of sampling from an approximation to the 
posterior distribution of the hidden variables is presented here for the first time. Our results 
indicate that the Fisher scoring algorithm gives better estimates of the expected value of 
the hidden variable than the EKFS based approximations. Note that the Fisher scoring al- 
gorithm is more complex in requiring typically 5 forward-backward passes instead of only 
one forward-backward pass for the EKFS approach. Our experiments also showed that if 
the posterior distribution is multimodal, the mixture of modes approach gives significantly 
better estimates if compared to the approaches based on a single Gaussian approximation. 
Our learning experiments show that it is important to sample from the approximate dis- 
tributions and that it is not sufficient to simply substitute point estimates. Based on the 
408 T. Briegel and V. Tresp 
0.2 
0.16 
0.14 
0.02 
0 
0 10 
t=294 
0.4 
0_35 
0.3 
--10 0 
t=295 
Figure 1: Approximations to the posterior distributionp(xt IY40o, U4o0) for t = 294 and t - 
295. The continuous line shows the posterior distribution based on Gibbs sampling using 
1000 samples and can be considered a close approximation to the true posterior. The EKFS 
approximation (dotted) does not converge to a mode. The Fisher scoring solution (dash- 
dotted) finds the largest mode. The mixture of modes approach with 50 modes (dashed) 
correctly finds the two modes. 
sampling approach it is also possible to estimate hyperparameters (e.g. the covariance ma- 
trices) which was not done in this paper. The approaches can also be extended towards 
online learning and estimation in various ways (e.g. missing data problems). 
Appendix: Mixture of Modes Algorithm 
The mixture of modes estimate M is derived as a weighted sum of k = 1,..., m individual Fisher 
scoring (mode) estimates [s,k. For m = 1 we obtain the Fisherscoring algorithm of subsection 3.3. 
First, one performs the set of forward recursions (t = 1,..., T) for each single mode estimator k. 
k  t ^FS,k'. x-k T ^FS,k 
tlt--1 = t[t--1 )t--llt--lt [t--1 }  Qt (lO) 
B -- k T FS,kxzk x--1 
-- t-l] t-lrt [xt- )[*1*-) (11) 
k --1   FS,k 
((s.-1) 
- )) 
k  FS,k 
7 - s,t, I+B *  
- 7,_ (13) 
 FS,kx 
with the initialization E1o = Qo, 7o = so o ). en, one peffos the set of backward smooth- 
ing recursions (t = T,..., 1) 
(D-i) -1 = -llt-1 - Blt-lB T (4) 
k k --1 kkk T 
Z,_ = (D,_) +,, (15) 
- + 
= = and 
with F,(z) = o_ o 
initialization 6   s, 
= E7. e k individual mode estimates w, are obtained by iterative applica- 
yFS,k . .FS,k yFS,k rFS,k FS,k 
tion of the update mle  :=  A with stepsize whe = o , .-.,w 
and 6 = {6,...,  }. After convergence we obtain the mixture of modes estimate as the weighted 
sum M k=l kFS,k 
=  a w, with weighting coefficients a := a where a(t = T - 1,..., 0) 
1 
are computed recursively starting with a unifo prior a =  ((wlp, ) stands for a Gaussian 
with center p and covafiance  evaluated at w): 
 +l(,l ( s' , 
=  xsj (17) 
   FS,kxk FS,kT 
- , ) , ) + (18) 
Fisher Scoring and Mixture of Modes for Inference and Learning in NSSM 409 
9 
8 
7 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
uJ (3,.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
Figure 2: Left (inference): The heights of the bars indicate the mean squared error between 
the true :et (which we know since we simulated the system) and the estimates using the 
various approximations. The error bars show the standard deviation derived from 20 rep- 
etitions of the experiment. Based on the paired t-test, Fisher scoring is significantly better 
than the EKFS and all mixture of modes approaches are significantly better than both EKFS 
and Fisher scoring based on a 1% rejection region. The mixture of modes approximation 
with 50 modes (MM 50) is significantly better than the approximation using 20 modes. The 
improvement of the approximation using 20 modes (MM 20) is not significantly better than 
the approximation with 10 (MM 10) modes using a 5% rejection region. 
Right (learning): The heights of the bars indicate the mean squared error between the true 
fo (.) (which is known) and the approximations using a multi-layer perceptron with 3 hid- 
den units and T = 200. Shown are results using the EKFS approximation, (left) the Fisher 
scoring approximation (center) and the mixture of modes approximation (right). There are 
two bars for each experiment: The left bars show results where the expected value of :et 
calculated using the approximating Gaussians are used as (single) samples for the general- 
ized M-step - in other words - we use a point estimate for :et. Using the point estimates, the 
results of all three approximations are not significantly different based on a 5% significance 
level. The right bars shows the result where $ = 50 samples are generated for approxi- 
mating the gradient using the Gaussian approximations. The results using sampling are all 
significantly better than the results using point estimates (1% significance level). The sam- 
pling approach using the mixture of modes approximation is significantly better than the 
other two sampling-based approaches (1% significance level). If compared to the inference 
results of the experiments shown on the left, we achieved a mean squared error of 6.02 for 
the mixture of modes approach with 10 modes which is not significantly worse than the 
results the with the true model of 5.87 (5% significance level). 
References 
Anderson, B. and Moore, J. (1979) Optimal Filtering, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey. 
Fahrmeir, L. and Kaufmann, H. (1991) On Kalman Filtering, Posterior Mode Estimation and Fisher 
Scoring in Dynamic Exponential Family Regression, Metrika, 38, pp. 37-60. 
Ghahramani, Z. and Roweis, S. (1999) Learning Nonlinear Stochastic Dynamics using the Gener- 
alized EM Algorithm, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 11, et:ls. M. Keams, S. 
Solla, D. Cohn, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Kitagawa, G. (1987) Non-Gaussian State Space Modeling of Nonstationary Time Series (with Com- 
ments), JASA 82, pp. 1032-1063. 
Puskorius, G. and Feldkamp, L. (1994) Neurocontrol of Nonlinear Dynamical Systems with Kalman 
Filter Trained Recurrent Networks, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 5:2, pp. 279-297. 
Sage, A. and Melsa, J. (1971 ) Estimation Theory with Applications to Communications and Control, 
McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Shumway, R. and Stoffer, D. (1982) Time Series Smoothing and Forecasting Using the EM Algo- 
rithm, Technical Report No. 27, Division of Statistics, UC Davis. 
Tresp, V. and Hofmann, R. (1995) Missing and Noisy Data in Nonlinear Time-Series Prediction, 
Neural Networks for Signal Processing 5, IEEE Sig. Pmc. Soc., pp. 1-10. 
