Efficient Bayesian Parameter Estimation in Large 
Discrete Domains 
Nir Friedman 
Hebrew University 
nirOcs. huj i. ac. il 
Yoram Singer 
AT&T Labs 
sinerOresearch. art. com 
Abstract 
We examine the problem of estimating the parameters of a multinomial 
distribution over a large number of discrete outcomes, most of which 
do not appear in the training data. We analyze this problem from a 
Bayesian perspective and develop a hierarchical prior that incorporates 
the assumption that the observed outcomes constitute only a small subset 
of the possible outcomes. We show how to efficiently perform exact 
inference with this form of hierarchical prior and compare it to standard 
approaches. 
1 Introduction 
One of the most important problems in statistical inference is multinomialestimation: Given 
a past history of observations independent trials with a discrete set of outcomes, predict 
the probability of the next trial. Such estimators are the basic building blocks in more 
complex statistical models, such as prediction trees [ 1, 12, 11], hidden Markov models [9] 
and Bayesian networks [3, 6]. The roots of multinomial estimation go back to Laplace's 
work in the 18th century [7]. 
In Bayesian theory, the classic approach to multinomial estimation is via the use of the 
Dirichlet distribution (see for instance [4]). Laplace's "law of succession" and other 
common methods can be derived using Bayesian inference with the Dirichlet distribution 
as a prior distribution. The Dirichlet distribution has several properties that are useful 
in statistical inference. In particular, estimates with Dirichlet priors are consistent (the 
estimate converges with probability one to the true distribution), conjugate (the posterior 
distribution is also a Dirichlet distribution), and can be computed efficiently (queries of 
interest have a closed-form solution). Furthermore, theoretical studies of online prediction 
of individual sequences show that prediction using Dirichlet priors is competitive with any 
other prior distribution (see for instance [2] and the references therein). 
Unfortunately, in some key applications, Dirichlet priors are unwieldy. These applications 
are characterized by several features: ( a ) The set of possible outcomes is extremely large, 
and often not known in advance. (b) The number of training examples is small compared 
418 N. Friedman and Y. Singer 
to the number of possible outcomes. (c) The outcomes that have positive probability 
constitute a relatively small subset of the possible outcomes; this subset, however, is not 
known in advance. In these situations, predictions based on a Dirichlet priors tend to assign 
most of the probability mass to outcomes that were not seen in the training set. 
For example, consider a natural language application, where outcomes are words drawn 
from an English dictionary, and the problem is predicting the probability of words that follow 
a particular word, say "Bosnia". If we do not have any prior knowledge, we can consider 
any word in the dictionary as a possible candidate. Yet, our knowledge of language would 
lead us to believe that in fact, only few words, such as "Herzegovina", should naturally 
follow the word "Bosnia". Furthermore, even in a large corpus, we do not expect to see 
many training examples that involve this phrase. As another example consider the problem 
of estimating the parameters of a discrete dynamical system. Here the task is to find a 
distribution over the states that can be reached from a particular state s (possibly after the 
system receives an external control signal). Again, in many domains it is natural to assume 
that the system is sparse: only a small subset of states is reachable from any state. 
In this paper, we present a Bayesian treatment of this problem using an hierarchical prior 
that averages over an exponential number of hypotheses each of which represents a subset 
of the feasible outcomes. Such a prior was previously used in a specific context of online 
prediction using suffix tree transducers [11]. As we show, although this prior involves 
exponentially many hypotheses, we can efficiently perform predictions. Moreover, our 
approach allows us to deal with countably infinite number of outcomes. 
2 Dirichlet priors 
Let X be a random variable that can take L possible values from a set E. Without loss of 
generality, let E - { 1,... L}. We are given a training set D that contains the outcomes 
of N independent draws ate,..., atv of X from an unknown multinomial distribution ?*. 
We denote by Ni be the number of occurrences of the Symbol i in the training data. The 
multinomial estimation problem is to find a good approximation for ?*. 
This problem can be stated as the problem of predicting the outcome atv+  given at ,..., atN. 
Given a prior distribution over the possible multinomial distributions, the Bayesian estimate 
is: 
P(x I = f P( xN+ 
where 0 -- (01,..., 0z,) is a vector that describes possible values of the (unknown) proba- 
bilities P* ( 1),..., P* (L), and  is the "context" variable that denotes all other assumptions 
about the domain. (We consider particular contexts in the next section.) 
The posterior probability of 0 can rewritten using Bayes law as: 
P(O I P(xl,...,x N I - P(O If) II 
i 
The family of Dirichlet distributions is conjugate to the multinomial distribution. That is, 
if the prior distribution is from this family, so is the posterior. A Dirichlet prior for X is 
specified by hyperparameters a,..., az,, and has the form: 
P(01)-- I"(-]4øq)'HO'-I (Oi-- 1 andOi _> Oforalli) 
YIi l"(oq) i i 
where F(x) = fo  t:-le-tdt is the gamma function. Given a Dirichlet prior, the initial 
prediction for each value of X is P(X 1 = i] - foiP(Ol)dO- It is 
Efficient Bayesian Parameter Estimation in Large Discrete Domains 419 
easy to see that, if the prior is a Dirichlet prior with hyperparameters ct,..., aL, then the 
posterior is a Dirichlet with hyperparameters ct + N,..., aœ + Nœ. Thus, we get that 
the prediction for X N+ is P(X N+ -- i [ z,...,zN,) -- (ai +,Ni)/5-j(aj q- Nj). 
We can think of the hyperparameters oi as the number of "imaginary' examples in which 
we saw outcome i. Thus, the ratio between hyperparameters corresponds to our initial 
assessment of the relative probability of the corresponding outcomes. The total weight of 
the hyperparameters represent our confidence (or entrenchment) in the prior knowledge. 
As we can see, if this weight is large, our estimates for the parameters tend to be further off 
from the empirical frequencies observed in the training data. 
3 Hierarchical priors 
We now describe structured priors that capture our uncertainty about the set of "feasible" 
values of X. We define a random variable V that takes values from the set 2 z of possible 
subsets of Z. The intended semantics for this variable is that Oi > 0 iff i 6 V. 
Clearly, the hypothesis V = Z  (for Z  C_ Z) is consistent with training data only if Z  
contains all the indices i for which Ni > 0. We denote by Z ø the set of observed symbols. 
That is, Z ø = {i ß Ni > 0}, and we let k ø = IZøI- 
Suppose we know the value of V. Given this assumption, we can define a Dirichlet prior 
over possible multinomial distributions 0 if we use the same hyper-parameter ct for each 
symbol in V. Formally, we define the prior: 
P(OIV) = 
Using Eq. (2), 
r(Ivl-) 07-' 
iv 
we have that: 
(E Oi -- 1, Vi, Oi >_ O, and Oi -- 0 for all i  V) 
i 
,.. IVla+N 
P(X - i lz V) = 0 
(3) 
ifi6 V 
(4) 
otherwise 
Now consider the case where we are uncertain about the actual set of feasible outcomes. 
We construct a two tiered prior over the values of V. We start with a prior over the size 
of V, and then assume that all sets of the same cardinality have the same prior probability. 
We let the random variable $ denote the cardinality of V. We assume that we are given a 
distribution P(S = k) for k -- 1,..., L. We define the prior over sets to be: 
P(V[$: k)= (5) 
We now examine how to compute the posterior predictions given this hierarchical prior. Let 
D denote the training data a:  ,..., z N. Then it is easy to verify that 
P(X N+ =il D) 
_ y a+ Ni )' P(V[D) (6) 
ka+ N  
k v, lvl=k,iv 
Let us now examine which sets V actually contribute to this sum. 
First, we note that sets that do not contain 5; ø have zero posterior probability, since they 
are inconsistent with the observed data. Thus, we can examine only sets V that contain Z ø. 
Second, as we noted above, P(D I V) is the same for all sets of cardinality k that contain 
Z ø. Moreover, by definition the prior for all these sets is the same. Using Bayes rule, we 
conclude that P(V I D) is the same for all sets of size k that contain Z ø. Thus, we can 
420 N. Friedman and Y. Singer 
simplify the inner summation in Eq. (6), by multiplying the number of sets in the score of 
the summation by the posterior probability of such sets. 
There are two cases. If i 6 Y?, then any set V that has non-zero posterior probability for i 
appears in the sum. Thus, in this case we can write: 
P(X N+I = i ] D) =   + Ni P(S = kid ) if/6 Z ø 
ka+N 
If i  Z ø, then we need to estimate the fraction of subsets of V with non-zero posterior that 
contain i. This leads to an equation similar to the one above, but with a correction for this 
fraction. By symmetry all unobserved outcomes have the same posterior probability. Thus, 
we can simply divide the mass that was not assigned to the observed outcomes among the 
unseen symbols. 
Notice that the single term in Eq. (3) that depends on Ni can be moved outside 
the summation. Thus, to make predictions, we only need to estimate the quantity: 
C(O, L) L o+Ne(k i O) 
"- Ek=k ø ka+N 
and then 
P(X v+' = i l D)= { ø+JvC(D'L) if/6 Z ø 
_A-(1-C(D,L)) ifiCZ ø 
We can therefore think of C(D, L) as scaling factor that we apply to the Dirichlet prediction 
that assumes that we have seen all of the feasible symbols. The quantity 1 - C(D, L) is the 
probability mass assigned to novel (i.e., unseen) outcomes. Using properties of Dirichlet 
priors we get the following characterization of C(D, L). 
mk 
Proposition 3.1: P($ = kid ) = 
! r() 
where rn = P($ = k) -. ß r(a+N)' 
Proof: To compute C(D, L), we need to compute P(S = k ] D). Using Bayes rule, we 
have that 
P(D I S = k)P(S = k) (7) 
P(k I o) = P(D IS = k')P(S = k') 
By introduction of variables, we have that: 
P(D I S = k) =  P(D I V)P(V I S = k). 
v_ro,lvl= 
Using standard properties of Difichlet priors, we have that if Zo  V, then 
e(OlW) = r(Iwl + w) (8) 
Now, using Eq. (8) and (5), we get that ifZ ø  V, d k = IvI, then 
F(k, + N) F(a)  F(, + Ni). (9) 
iE o 
ThUS, 
P(OIS=k) 
(10) 
Efficient Bayesian Parameter Estimation in Large Discrete Domains 421 
0.3 
0.25 
0.2 
0.15 
0.1 
0.05 
N = 20 ß 
'' N = 50 .... -- 
,'"A N = 100 
,' , N = 200 
,;/ . ,x N = 400 
,,' I ,;// ,  '-'- 
20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 
k 
1 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0,6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
- N 50 .....  
N 100 
'N 200 
N 400 ...... 
I I I I 
50 100 150 200 250 
L 
B 
Figure 1' Left: Illustration of the posterior distribution P (S I D) for different values of N, 
with k ø = 20, L = 100, c = .25, and P(S = k) oc 0.25 . Right: Illustration showing the 
change in C(D, L) for different values of N, with k ø: 25, c - 1, and P(S = k) oc 0.9 . 
The term in the square brackets does not depend on the choice of k. Thus, it cancels out 
when plug Eq. (10) in Eq.(7). The desired equality follows directly. I 
From the above proposition we immediately get that 
kc + N rn  
k=k ø kt_> k ø 
rn (11) 
Note that P(S = k I D) and C(D, L) depend only on k ø and N and does not depend on the 
distribution of counts among the k ø observed symbols. Also note that when N is sufficiently 
larger than k ø (and this depends on the choice of a), then the term (_o)! r(+N) is 
much smaller than 1. This implies that the posterior for larger sets decays rapidly. We can 
see this behavior on the left hand side of Figure 1 that shows the posterior distribution of 
?($ I D) for different dataset sizes. 
4 Unbounded alphabets 
By examining the analytic form of C(D, L), we see that the dependency on L is expressed 
only in the number of terms in the summation. If the terms rn vanish for large k, then 
C(D, L) becomes insensitive to the exact size of the alphabet. We can see this behavior on 
the right hand side of Figure 1, which shows C(D, L) as a function of L. As we can see, 
when L is close to le ø, then C(D, L) is close to 1. As L grows, C(D, L) asymptotes to a 
value that depends on N and k ø (as well as a and the prior P(S = k)). 
This discussion suggests that we can apply our prior in cases where we do not know L 
in advance. In fact, we can assume that L is unbounded. That is, Z is isomorphic to 
{ 1,2,...}. Assume that we assign the prior P(S = k) for each choice of L, and that 
limœ_o P(S = k) exists for all k. We define C(D, oc) = limœ_o C(D, L). We then 
use for prediction the term P(X N+I - i 
-- koo+N 
For this method to work, we have to ensure that C(D, oo) is well defined; that is, that the 
limit exists. Two such cases are identified by the following proposition (proof omitted). 
Proposition 4. h If P(S : k)is exponentially decreasing in k or if r _> 1 and P(S -- k) 
is polynomially decreasing in k, then C ( D , oo ) is well-defined. 
In practice we evaluate C(D, oo) by computing successive values of (the logarithm of) 
rn, until we reach values that are significantly smaller than the largest value beforehand. 
422 N. Friedman and Y. Singer 
Method 
A  
B (Approximated Good-Turing) 
Sparse-Multinomial (Poly) 
Sparse-Multinomial (Exp) 
Perplexity 
Observed Novel Overall 
28.19 141.7 28.20 
28.15 802.7 28.19 
27.97 3812.9 28.02 
27.97 3913.1 28.03 
Table 1' Perplexity results on heterogeneous character data. 
Since rn is exponentially decaying, we can ignore the mass in the tail of the sequence. As 
we can see from the right hand side of Figure 1, there is not much difference between the 
prediction using a large L, and unbounded one. 
5 Empirical evaluation 
We used the proposed estimation method to construct statistical models for predicting the 
probability of characters in the context of the previously observed character. Such models, 
often referred to as bigram models, are of great interest in applications such as optical 
character recognition and text compression. We tested two of prior distributions for the 
alphabet size Po(S = k): an exponential prior, Po(S -- k) o/3, and a polynomial prior, 
Po(S = k) o k -. The training and test material were derived from various archives and 
included different types of files such C programs, core dumps, and ascii text files. The 
alphabet for the algorithm consists of all the (ascii and non-ascii) 256 possible characters. 
The training data consisted of around 170 mega bytes and for testing we used 35 mega 
bytes. 
Each model we compared had to assign a probability to any character. If a character 
was not observed in the context of the previous character, the new character is assigned 
the probability of the total mass of novel events. We compared our approach with two 
estimation techniques that have been shown to perform well on natural data sets [13]. The 
first estimates the probability of a symbol i in the context of a given word as  where 
r is the number of different characters observed at given context (the previous character). 
The second method, based on an approximation of the Good-Turing estimation scheme [5], 
estimates the probability of a symbol i as (-f/V)N' where f is the number of different 
N ' 
characters that have been observed only once at for the given context (for more details 
see [ 13]). For evaluation we used the perplexity which is simply the exponentiation of the 
average log-loss on the test data. Table 1 summarizes the average test-set perplexity for 
observed characters, novel events, and the overall perplexity. In the experiments we fixed 
ct = 1/2 for the parameters of the Dirichlet priors and/3 = 2 for the exponentially and 
polynomially decaying priors of the alphabet size. 
One can see from the table that predictions using sparse-multinomials achieve the lowest 
overall perplexity. (The differences are statistically significant due to the size of the data.) 
The performance based on the two different priors for the alphabet size is comparable. The 
results indicate the all the leverage in using sparse-multinomials for prediction is due to 
more accurate predictions for observed events. Indeed, the perplexity of novel events using 
sparse-multinomials is much higher than when using either method A or B. Put another 
way, our approach prefers to "sacrifice" events with low probability (novel events) and 
suffer high loss in favor of more accurate predictions for frequently occurring events. The 
net effect is a lower overall perplexity. 
Efficient Bayesian Parameter Estimation in Large Discrete Domains 
6 Discussion 
423 
In this paper we presented a Bayesian approach for the problem of estimating the parameters 
of a multinomial source over a large alphabet. Our method is based on hierarchical priors. 
We clearly identify the assumptions made by these priors. Given these assumptions, 
prediction reduces to probabilistic inference. Our main result is showing how to perform 
this inference exactly in an efficient manner. Among the numerous techniques that have 
been used for multinomial estimation the one proposed by Ristad [10] is the closest to 
ours. Though the methodology used by Ristad is substantially different than ours, his 
method can been seen as a special case of sparse-multinomials with ct set to 1 and with a 
specific prior on alphabet sizes. The main advantage of these choices is a simpler inference 
procedure. This simplicity comes at the price of losing flexibility. In addition, our method 
explicitly represents the posterior distribution. Hence, it is more suitable for tasks, such 
as stochastic sampling, where an explicit representation of the approximated distribution 
is required. Finally, our method can be combined with other Bayesian approaches for 
language modeling such as the one proposed by MacKay and Peto [8], and with Bayesian 
approaches for learning complex models such as Bayesian networks [6]. 
Acknowledgments We are grateful to Fernando Pereira and Stuart Russell for discussions 
related to this work. This work was done while Nir Friedman was at U.C. Berkeley and 
supported by ARO under grant number DAAH04-96-1-0341 and by ONR under grant 
number N00014-97-1-0941. 
References 
[10] 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
[1] w. Buntine. Learning classification trees. In Artificial Intelligence Frontiers in 
Statistics. Chapman & Hall, 1993. 
[2] B.S. Clarke and A.R. Barron. Jeffrey's prior is asymptotically least favorable under 
entropic risk. J. Stat. Planning and Inference, 41:37-60, 1994. 
[3] G. F. Cooper and E. Herskovits. A Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic 
networks from data. Machine Learning, 9:309-347, 1992. 
[4] M. H. DeGroot. Optimal Statistical Decisions. McGraw-Hill, 1970. 
[5] I.J. Good. The population frequencies of species and the estimation of population 
parameters. Biometrika, 40(3): 237-264, 1953. 
[6] D. Heckerman, D. Geiger, and D. M. Chickering. Learning Bayesian networks: The 
combination of knowledge and statistical data. Machine Learning, 20:197-243, 1995. 
[7] P.S. Laplace. Philosophical Essay on Probabilities. Springer-Verlag, 1995. 
[8] D.J.C. MacKay and L. Peto. A hierarchical Dirichlet language model. Natural 
Language Eng., 1(3): 1-19, 1995. 
[9] L. R. Rabiner and B. H. Juang. An introduction to hidden Markov models. IEEE 
ASSP Mag., 3(1):4-16, 1986. 
E. Ristad. A natural law of succession. Tech. Report CS-TR-495-95, Princeton Univ., 
1995. 
Y. Singer. Adaptive mixtures of probabilistic transducers. Neur. Comp., 9(8): 1711- 
1734, 1997. 
F.M.J. Willems, Y.M. Shtarkov, and T.J. Tjalkens. The context tree weighting method: 
basic properties. IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, 41(3):653-664, 1995. 
I.H. Witten and T.C. Bell. The zero-frequency problem: estimating the probabilities of 
novel events in adaptive text compression. IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, 37(4): 1085- 
1094, 1991. 
