Computation of Smooth Optical Flow in a 
Feedback Connected Analog Network 
Alan Stocker * 
Institute of Neuroinformatics 
University and ETH Ztirich 
Winterthurerstrasse 190 
8057 Ztirich, Switzerland 
Rodney Douglas 
Institute of Neuroinformatics 
University and ETH Ztirich 
Winterthurerstrasse 190 
8057 Ztirich, Switzerland 
Abstract 
In 1986, Tanner and Mead [1] implemented an interesting constraint sat- 
isfaction circuit for global motion sensing in aVLSI. We report here a 
new and improved aVLSI implementation that provides smooth optical 
flow as well as global motion in a two dimensional visual field. The com- 
putation of optical flow is an ill-posed problem, which expresses itself as 
the aperture problem. However, the optical flow can be estimated by the 
use of regularization methods, in which additional constraints are intro- 
duced in terms of a global energy functional that must be minimized. We 
show how the algorithmic constraints of Horn and Schunck [2] on com- 
puting smooth optical flow can be mapped onto the physical constraints 
of an equivalent electronic network. 
1 Motivation 
The perception of apparent motion is crucial for navigation. Knowledge of local motion of 
the environment relative to the observer simplifies the calculation of important tasks such as 
time-to-contact or focus-of-expansion. There are several methods to compute optical flow. 
They have the common problem that their computational load is large. This is a severe 
disadvantage for autonomous agents, whose computational power is restricted by energy, 
size and weight. Here we show how the global regularization approach which is necessary 
to solve for the ill-posed nature of computing optical flow, can be formulated as a local 
feedback constraint, and implemented as a physical analog device that is computationally 
efficient. 
* correspondence to: alan@ini.phys.ethz.ch 
Computation of Optical Flow in an Analog Network 707 
2 Smooth Optical Flow 
Horn and Schunck [2] defined optical flow in relation to the spatial and temporal changes 
in image brightness. Their model assumes that the total image brightness E(x, y, t) does 
not change over time; 
d 
E(x,y,t) -0. (1) 
Expanding equation (1) according to the chain rule of differentiation leads to 
  ,t) 0, (2) 
E(x,y,t)u + E(x,y,t)v + = 
F- 6x 
where u -- dx/dt and v = dy/dt represent the two components of the local optical flow 
vector. 
Since there is one equation for two unknowns at each spatial location, the problem is 
ill-posed, and there are an infinite number of possible solutions lying on the constraint 
line for every location (x, y). However, by introducing an additional constraint the prob- 
lem can be regularized and a unique solution can be found. 
For example, Horn and Schunck require the optical flow field to be smooth. As a measure 
of smoothness they choose the squares of of the spatial derivatives of the flow vectors, 
= + + k(Sx J + (3) 
One can also view this constraint as introducing a priori knowledge: the closer two points 
are in the image space the more likely they belong to the projection of the same object. Un- 
der the assumption of rigid objects undergoing translational motion, this constraint implies 
that the points have the same, or at least very similar motion vectors. This assumption is 
obviously not valid at boundaries of moving objects, and so this algorithm fails to detect 
motion discontinuities [3]. 
The computation of smooth optical flow can now be formulated as the minimization prob- 
lem of a global energy functional, 
f f ,F + S 2 dx dy > rain (4) 
ß 
L 
with F and S 2 as in equation (2) and (3) respectively. Thus, we exactly apply the approach 
of standard regularization theory [4]: 
Ax=y 
x -- A-ly 
II Ax- y II 
+ & IIP t1 = min 
y: data 
inverse problem, ill-posed 
regularization 
The regularization parameter, A, controls the degree of smoothing of the solution and its 
closeness to the data. The norm, II ß II, is quadratic. A difference in our case is that A 
is not constant but depends on the data. However, if we consider motion on a discrete 
time-axis and look at snapshots rather than continuously changing images, A is quasi- 
stationary. 1 The energy functional (4) is convex and so, a simple numerical technique 
like gradient descent would be able to find the global minimum. To compute optical flow 
while preserving motion discontinuities one can modify the energy functional to include 
a binary line process that prevents smoothing over discontinuities [4]. However, such an 
functional will not be convex. Gradient descent methods would probably fail to find the 
global amongst all local minima and other methods have to be applied. 
In the aVLSI implementation this requires a much shorter settling time constant for the network 
than the brightness changes in the image. 
708 A. Stocker and R. Douglas 
3 A Physical Analog Model 
3.1 Continuous space 
Standard regularization problems can be mapped onto electronic networks consisting of 
conductances and capacitors [5]. Hutchinson et al. [6] showed how resistive networks can 
be used to compute optical flow and Poggio et al. [7] introduced electronic network so- 
lutions for second-order-derivative optic flow computation. However, these proposed net- 
work architectures all require complicated and sometimes negative conductances although 
Harris et al. [8] outlined a similar approach as proposed in this paper independently. Fur- 
thermore, such networks were not implemented practically, whereas our implementation 
with constant nearest neighbor conductances is intuitive and straightforward. 
Consider equation (4): 
L = L(u, v, Vu, Vv, x, y). 
The Lagrange function L is sufficiently regular (L  C2), and thus it follows from cal- 
culus of variation that the solution of equation (4) also suffices the linear Euler-Lagrange 
equations 
AV2u-Ex(Exu+Eyv+Et) = 0 (5) 
AV2v- Ey(Exu + Esv + Et) = O. 
The Euler-Lagrange equations are only necessary conditions for equation (4). The suffi- 
cient condition for solutions of equations (5) to be a weak minimum is the strong Legendre- 
condition, that is 
Lvuvu > 0 and Lvvvv > 0, 
which is easily shown to be true. 
3.2 Discrete Space - Mapping to Resistive Network 
By using a discrete five-point approximation of the Laplacian $72 on a regular grid, equa- 
tions (5) can be rewritten as 
/(Ui+i,j q- Ui--l,j q- Ui,j+l q- Ui,j--1 -- 4ui,j) -- Ex,(Ex,,ui,j q- Ey,vi,j + Et,):0 
)t(Vi+l,j q-Vi--l,j q- Vi,j+l q- Vi,j--1 -4vi,) - Ey,,,(E,,jui, + Ey,jvi,j + Et,,j)=O 
where i and j are the indices for the sampling nodes. Consider a single node of the resistive 
network shown in Figure 1: 
(6) 
Figure 1: Single node of a resistive network. 
From Kirchhoff's law it follows that 
cd¬, 
dt = G(V/+, + V/_, + V/,j+i + V/,-i - 4V/,j) + Ii,, 
(7) 
Computation of Optical Flow in an Analog Network 709 
where V/,j represents the voltage and Iim,j 
two neighboring nodes and C the node capacitance. 
In steady state, equation (7) becomes 
G(V/+i,j + V/-1,j q- V/,j+i q- V/,j-1 - 4V/,j) + Iin,,, = O. 
The analogy with equations (6) is obvious: 
G < > 
Iuini,5   
Ivim,s   
the input current. G is the conductance between 
(8) 
-E,s (E,. ui,j + Ey,,svi,j + Et,,s ) 
-Ey,s (E,,j ui, + Ey,s vi,j + Et,s ) 
(9) 
To create the full system we use two parallel resistive networks in which the node voltages 
Ui,j and V/,j represent the two components of the optical flow vector u and v. The input 
currents Iuim,s and Ivim, are computed by a negative recurrent feedback loop modulated 
by the input data, which are the spatial and temporal intensity gradients. 
Notice that the input currents are proportional to the deviation of the local brightness con- 
straint: the less the local optical flow solution fits the data the higher the current Iim,s will 
be to correct the solution and vice versa. 
Stability and convergence of the network are guaranteed by Maxwell's minimum power 
principle [4, 9]. 
4 The Smooth Optical Flow Chip 
4.1 Implementation 
G V, G V,., 
G 
V,j U V 
ß .- r - Gload 
Figure 2: A single motion cell within the three layer network. For simplicity only one 
resistive network is shown. 
The circuitry consists of three functional layers (Figure 2). The input layer includes an 
array of adaptive photoreceptors [ 10] and provides the derivatives of the image brightness 
to the second layer. The spatial gradients are the first-order linear approximation obtained 
by subtracting the two neighboring photoreceptor outputs. The second layer computes the 
input current to the third layer according to equations (9). Finally these currents are fed 
into the two resistive networks that report the optical flow components. 
The schematics of the core of a single motion cell are drawn in Figure 3. The photoreceptor 
and the temporal differentiator are not shown as well as the other half of the circuitry that 
computes the y-component of the flow vector. 
710 A. Stocker and R. Douglas 
A few remarks are appropriate here: First, the two components of the optical flow vector 
have to be able to take on positive and negative values with respect to some reference po- 
tential. Therefore, a symmetrical circuit scheme is applied where the positive and negative 
(reference voltage) values are carried on separate signal lines. Thus, the actual value is 
encoded as the difference of the two potentials. 
.4- 
E t E t 
[x([ Vx 
temporal 
differentiator 
EMV 
+ 
E x 
_J_ tVViBias 
V + 
X DiffBias 
OpBias Vref 
Figure 3' Cell core schematics; only the circuitry related to the computation of the 
x-component of the flow vector is shown. 
Second, the limited linear range of the Gilbert multipliers leads to a narrow span of flow ve- 
locities that can be computed reliably. However, the tuning can be such that the operational 
range is either at high or very low velocities. Newer implementations are using modified 
multipliers with a larger linear range. 
Third, consider a single motion cell (Figure 2). In principle, this cell would be able to sat- 
isfy the local constraint perfectly. In practice (see Figure 3), the finite output impedance of 
the p-type Gilbert multiplier slightly degrades this ideal solution by imposing an effective 
conductance Gload. Thus, a constant voltage on the capacitor representing a non-zero mo- 
tion signal requires a net output current of the multiplier to maintain it. This requirement 
has two interesting consequences: 
i) The reported optical flow is dependent on the spatial gradients (contrast). A single un- 
coupled cell according to Figure 2 has a steady state solution with 
-Et,s Exl,s and Vi,j ,.., -Et,s Ey,s 
Ui,j ' (Gload + Ez2i j + E 2 ) (Gload + E 2 + E 2 ) 
ß ]i,j 3Ci,j ]i,j 
respectively. For the same object speed, the chip reports higher velocity signals for higher 
spatial gradients. Preferably, Gloact should bc as low as possible to minimize its influence 
on the solution. 
ii) On the other hand, the locally ill-posed problem is now well-posed because Glo,a im- 
poses a second constraint. Thus, the chip behaves sensibly in the case of low contrast 
input (small gradients), reporting zero motion where otherwise, unreliable high values 
would occur. This is convenient because the signal-to-noise ratio at low contrast is very 
poor. Furthermore, a single cell is forced to report the velocity on the constraint line with 
smallest absolute value, which is normal to the spatial gradient. That means that the chip 
Computation of OpticaI Flow in an Analog Network 711 
reports normal flow when there is no neighbor connection. Since there is an trade-off be- 
tween the robustness of the optical flow computation and a low conductance Gloaa, the 
follower-connected transconductance amplifier in our implementation allows us to control 
Glocct above its small intrinsic value. 
4.2 Results 
The results reported below were obtained from a MOSIS tinychip containing a 7x7 array 
of motion cells each 325x325 h e in size. The chip was fabricated in 1.2 ttm technology at 
AMI. 
a b c 
Figure 4: Smooth optical flow response of the chip to an left-upwards moving edge. 
a: photoreceptor output, the arrow indicates the actual motion direction. b: weak coupling 
(small conductance G). c: strong coupling. 
b 
1 2 3 4 $ 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
a c 
Figure 5: Response of the optical flow chip to a plaid stimulus moving towards the left: 
a: photoreceptor output; b shows the normal flow computation with disabled coupling 
between the motion cells in the network while in c the coupling strength is at maximum. 
The chip is able to compute smooth optical flow in a qualitative manner. The smoothness 
can be set by adjusting the coupling conductances (Figure 4). Figure 5b presents the nor- 
mal flow computation that occurs when the coupling between the motion cells is disabled. 
The limited resolution of this prototype chip together with the small size of the stimulus 
leads to a noisy response. However it is clear that the chip perceives the two gratings as 
separate moving objects with motion normal to their edge orientation. When the network 
712 A. Stocker and R. Douglas 
conductance is set very high the chip performs a collective computation solving the aper- 
ture problem under the assumption of single object motion. Figure 5c shows how the chip 
can compute the correct motion of a plaid pattern. 
5 Conclusion 
We have presented here an aVLSI implementation of a network that computes 2D smooth 
optical flow. The strength of the resistive coupling can be varied continuously to obtain 
different degrees of smoothing, from a purely local up to a single global motion signal. The 
chip ideally computes smooth optical flow in the classical definition of Horn and Schunck. 
Instead of using negative and complex conductances we implemented a network solution 
where each motion cell is performing a local constraint satisfaction task in a recurrent 
negative feedback loop. 
It is significant that the solution of a global energy minimization task can be achieved 
within a network of local constraint solving cells that do not have explicit access to the 
global computational goal. 
Acknowledgments 
This article is dedicated to Misha Mahowald. We would like to thank Eric Vittoz, J6rg 
Kramer, Giacomo Indiveri and Tobi Delbrfick for fruitful discussions. We thank the Swiss 
National Foundation for supporting this work and MOSIS for chip fabrication. 
References 
[10] 
[ 1 ] J. Tanner and C.A. Mead. An integrated analog optical motion sensor. In S.-Y. Kung, 
R. Owen, and G. Nash, editors, VLSI Signal Processing, 2, page 59 if. IEEE Press, 
1986. 
[2] B.K. Horn and B.G. Schunck. Determining optical flow. Artificial Intelligence, 
17:185-203, 1981. 
[3] A. Yuille. Energy functions for early vision and analog networks. Biological Cyber- 
netics, 61:115-123, 1989. 
[4] T. Poggio, V. Torre, and C. Koch. Computational vision and regularization theory. 
Nature, 317(26):314-319, September 1985. 
[5] B. K. Horn. Parallel networks for machine vision. Technical Report 1071, MIT AI 
Lab, December 1988. 
[6] J. Hutchinson, C. Koch, J. Luo, and C. Mead. Computing motion using analog and 
binary resistive networks. Computer, 21:52-64, March 1988. 
[7] T. Poggio, W. Yang, and V. Torre. Optical flow: Computational properties and net- 
works, biological and analog. The Computing Neuron, pages 355-370, 1989. 
[8] J.G. Harris, C. Koch, E. Staats, and J. Luo. Analog hardware for detecting disconti- 
nuities in early vision. Int. Journal of Computer Vision, 4:211-223, 1990. 
[9] J. Wyatt. Little-known properties of resistive grids that are useful in analog vision chip 
designs. In C. Koch and H. Li, editors, Vision Chips: Implementing Vision Algorithms 
with Analog VLSI Circuits, pages 72-89. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1995. 
S.C. Liu. Silicon retina with adaptive filtering properties. In Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems 10, November 1997. 
