Probabilistic Modeling for Face Orientation 
Discrimination' 
ß 
Learning from Labeled and Unlabeled Data 
Shumeet Baluja 
balujacs.cmu.edu 
Justsystem Pittsburgh Research Center & 
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University 
Abstract 
This paper presents probabilistic modeling methods to solve the problem of dis- 
criminating between five facial orientations with very little labeled data. Three 
models are explored. The first model maintains no inter-pixel dependencies, the 
second model is capable of modeling a set of arbitrary pair-wise dependencies, 
and the last model allows dependencies only between neighboring pixels. We 
show that for all three of these models, the accuracy of the learned models can 
be greatly improved by augmenting a small number of labeled training images 
with a large set of unlabeled images using Expectation-Maximization. This is 
important because it is often difficult to obtain image labels, while many unla- 
beled images are readily available. Through a large set of empirical tests, we 
examine the benefits of unlabeled data for each of the models. By using only 
two randomly selected labeled examples per class, we can discriminate between 
the five facial orientations with an accuracy of 94%; with six labeled examples, 
we achieve an accuracy of 98%. 
1 Introduction 
This paper examines probabilistic modeling techniques for discriminating between five 
face orientations: left profile, left semi-profile, frontal, right semi-profile, and right profile. 
Three models are explored: the first model represents no inter-pixel dependencies, the sec- 
ond model is c,,apable of modeling a set of arbitrary pair-wise dependencies, and the last 
model allows'p,endencies only between neighboring pixels. 
Models which capture inter-pixel dependencies can provide better classification perfor- 
mance than those that do not capture dependencies. The difficulty in using the more com- 
plex models, however, is that as more dependencies are modeled, more parameters must be 
estimated - which requires more training data. We show that by using Expectation-Maxi- 
mization, the accuracy of what is learned can be greatly improved by augmenting a small 
number of labeled training images with unlabeled images, which are much easier to obtain. 
The remainder of this section describes the problem of face orientation discrimination in 
detail. Section 2 provides a brief description of the probabilistic models explored. Section 3 
presents results with these models with varying amounts of training data. Also shown is 
how Expectation-Maximization can be used to augment the limited labeled training data 
with unlabeled training data. Section 4 briefly discusses related work. Finally, Section 5 
closes the paper with conclusions and suggestions for future work. 
Probabilistic Modeling for Face Orientation Discrimination 855 
1.1 Detailed Problem Description 
The interest in face orientation discrimination arises from two areas. First, the rapid 
increase in the availability of inexpensive cameras makes it practical to create systems 
which automatically monitor a person while using a computer. By using motion, color, 
and size cues, it is possible to quickly find and segment a person's face when he/she is sit- 
ting in front of a computer monitor. By determining whether the person is looking directly 
at the computer, or is staring away from the computer, we can provide feedback to any 
user interface that could benefit from knowing whether a user is paying attention or is dis- 
tracted (such as computer-based tutoring systems for children, computer games, or even 
car-mounted cameras that monitor drivers). 
Second, to perform accurate face detection for use in video-indexing or content-based 
image retrieval systems, one approach is to design detectors specific to each face orienta- 
tion, such as [Rowley et al., 1998, Sung 1996]. Rather than applying all detectors to every 
location, a face-orientation system can be applied to each candidate face location to 
"ronte" the candidate to the appropriate detector, thereby reducing the potential for false- 
positives, and also reducing the computational cost of applying each detector. This 
approach was taken in [Rowley et al., 1998]. 
For the experiments in this paper, each image to be classified is 20x20 pixels. The face is 
centered in the image, and comprises most of the image. Sample faces are shown in 
Figure 1. Empirically, our experiments show that accurate pose discrimination is possible 
from binary versions of the images. First, the images were histogram-equalized to values 
between 0 and 255. This is a standard non-linear transformation that maps an approxi- 
mately equal number of pixels to each value within the 0-255 range. It is used to improve 
the contrast in images. Second, to "binarize" the images, pixels with intensity above 128 
were mapped to a value of 255, otherwise the pixels were mapped to a value of 0. 
Frontal .... 
Right 
Half Profile 
Right Profile, 
Left 
Half Profile 
Left Profile 
Original Binary 
Figure 1:4 images of 
each of the 5 classes to be 
discriminated. Note the 
variability in the images. 
Left: Original Images. 
Right: Images after 
histogram equalization 
and binary quantization. 
2 Methods Explored 
This section provides a description of the probabilistic models explored: Naive-Bayes, 
Dependency Trees (as proposed by [Chow and Liu, 1968]), and a dependence network 
which models dependencies only between neighboring pixels. For more details on using 
Bayesian "multinets" (independent networks trained to model each class) for classifica- 
tion in a manner very similar to that used in this paper, see [Friedman, et al., 1997]. 
2.1 The Naive-Bayes Model 
The first, and simplest, model assumes that each pixel is independent of every other pixel. 
Although this assumption is clearly violated in real images, the model often yields good 
results with limited training data since it requires the estimation of the fewest parameters. 
Assuming that each image belongs exclusively to one of the five face classes to be dis- 
856 S. Baluja 
criminated, the probability of the image belonging to a particular class is given as follows: 
P(Classcllmage ) = 
P(ImagelClassc) x P(Classc) 
P(Image) 
400 
P(ImageIClassc) = I-I P(Pixel, IClassc) 
,=1 
P(PixeltIClass c) is estimated directly from the training data by: 
P(Pixel, lClassO - 
k+ 
Z Pixel, x P(Class½llmage ) 
Tra,nmglmages 
2k +  P(Class cllmage) 
Tra,n,nglmages 
Since we are only counting examples from the training images, P(Classcllmage) is 
known. The notation P(Classc[Image ) is used to represent image labels because it is con- 
venient for describing the counting process with both labeled and unlabeled data (this will 
be described in detail in Section 3). With the labeled data, P(Classcllmage) {0,1 }. Later, 
P(Class cllmage) may not be binary; instead, the probability mass may be divided between 
classes. Pixelt {0,1 } since the images are binary. k is a smoothing constant, set to 0.001. 
When used for classification, we compute the posterior probabilities and take the maxi- 
mum, Cpredicted, where: Cpred, cte d = argmax c P(Classcllmage) -= P(ImagelClassc) ß For sim- 
plicity, P(Classc) is assumed equal for all c; P(Irnage) is a normalization constant which 
can be ignored since we are only interested in finding the maximum posterior probability. 
2.2 Optimal Pair-Wise Dependency Trees 
We wish to model a probability distribution P(X 1 ..... X4oolClassc), where each X corre- 
sponds to a pixel in the image. Instead of assuming pixel independence, we restrict our 
model to the following form: 
P(X 1 ...X n Class c) 
i=1 
where Hx, is Xi's single "parent" variable. We require that there be no cycles in these 
"parent-of' relationships: formally, there must exist some permutation m = (ml, ..., mr) of 
(1 ..... n) such that (nx, = 3) = m(,) < mO') for all i. In other words, we restrict P' to 
factorizations representable by Bayesian networks in which each node (except the root) 
has one parent, i.e., tree-shaped graphs. 
A method for finding the optimal model within these restrictions is presented in [Chow 
and Liu, 1968]. A complete weighted graph G is created in which each variable X i is rep- 
resented by a corresponding vertex Vi, and in which the weight Wij for the edge between 
vertices V i and V: is set to the mutual information I(Xi,X: ) between X i and X: The edges 
ß . J . J . J' 
in the maximum spanning tree of G determine an optimal set of (n- 1) conditional probabil- 
ities with which to construct a tree-based model of the original probability distribution. 
We calculate the probabilities P(Xi) and P(Xi, X:) directly from the dataset. From these, 
we calculate the mutual information, I(Xi, Xj), be{ween all pairs of variables X i and Xj: 
P(X i = a, 5/= b) 
/(X/,5) = ZP(Xi=o, 5= b)'løgp(xl=a).piS=b) 
a,b 
The maximum spanning tree minimizes the Kullback-Leibler divergence D(PIIP') between 
Probabilistic Modeling for Face Orientation Discrimination 857 
the true and estimated distributions: 
D(P IIP') = P(X)log P(X) 
. P'(X) 
x 
as shown in [Chow & Liu, 1968]. Among all distributions of the same form, this distribu- 
tion maximizes the likelihood of the data when the data is a set of empirical observations 
drawn from any unknown distribution. 
2.3 Local Dependency Models 
Unlike the Dependency Trees presented in the previous section, the local dependency net- 
works only model dependencies between adjacent pixels. The most obvious dependencies 
to model are each pixel's eight neighbors. The dependencies are shown graphically in Fig- 
ure 2(left). The difficulty with the above representation is that two pixels may be depen- 
dent upon each other (if this above model was represented as a Bayesian network, it would 
contain cycles). Therefore, to avoid problems with circular dependencies, we use the fol- 
lowing model instead. Each pixel is still connected to each of its eight neighbors; how- 
ever, the arcs are directed such that the dependencies are acyclic. In this local dependence 
network, each pixel is only dependent on four of its neighbors: the three neighbors to the 
right and the one immediately below. The dependencies which are modeled are shown 
graphically in Figure 2 (right). The dependencies are: 
400 
P(ImageIClassc) = I-I P(Pixel, lrlr,ret,, Classc) 
P(Pixel, s Hp're.', s' Classc) = P(Pixeli j IPixel' + .s' Pixel, + 1.s , Pixel, +  s ' Pixel, s + ]' Classc) 
(ø'ø)1-1 [-1 [] 1--1 (o,o)1_1 Wl Wl 
[] [] I-I Wl W1 
[] '"] []  '" 
1--1 1--1 [] 1--1 Wl 
: : : : 
[--] i--] i--] i--] i--] ... i--](20,20) [] [-I [--] [--I [] ... [-1(2o,2o) 
Figure 2: Diagram of the dependencies maintained. Each square represents a pixel in the image. 
Dependencies are shown only for two pixels. (Left) Model with 8 dependencies - note that because this model 
has circular dependencies, we do not use it. Instead, we use the model shown on the Right. (Right) Model used 
has 4 dependencies per pixel. By imposing an ordering on the pixels, circular dependencies are avoided. 
3 Performance with Labeled and Unlabeled Data 
In this section, we compare the results of the three probabilistic models with varying 
amounts of labeled training data. The training set consists of between 1 and 500 labeled 
training examples, and the testing set contains 5500 examples. Each experiment is 
repeated at least 20 times with random train/test splits of the data. 
3.1 Using only Labeled Data 
In this section, experiments are conducted with only labeled data. Figure 3(left) shows 
each model's accuracy in classifying the images in the test set into the five classes. As 
858 S. Baluja 
expected, as more training data is used, the performance improves for all models. 
Note that the model with no-dependencies performs the best when there is little data. 
However, as the amount of data increases, the relative performance of this model, com- 
pared to the other models which account for dependencies, decreases. It is interesting to 
note that when there is little data, the Dependency Trees perform poorly. Since these trees 
can select dependencies between any two pixels, they are the most susceptible to fmding 
spurious dependencies. However, as the amount of data increases, the performance of this 
model rapidly improves. By using all of the labeled data (500 examples total), the Depen- 
dency Tree and the Local-Dependence network perform approximately the same, achiev- 
ing a correct classification rate of approximately 99%. 
11111 
oJo 
0.4o 
0.,3O 
0,3O 
 .... oeponcJoncy oo 
- / -- No Depenclncy 
ß 
1,00 
O,,OO 
O.40 
O3O 
O,3O 
_ ! 
I 
I 
- 
- --o,q)enae,'wy 
1 3 10 30 100 300 1 3 10 30 100 300 
="ntoi4 
Figu re 3: Performance of the three models. X Axis: Amount of labeled training data used. Y Axis: Percent 
correct on an independent test set. In the left graph, only labeled data was used. In the right graph, unlabeled and 
labeled data was used (the total number of examples were 500, with varying amounts of labeled data). 
3.2 Augmenting the Models with Unlabeled Data 
We can augment what is learned from only using the labeled examples by incorporating 
unlabeled examples through the use of the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm. 
Although the details of EM are beyond the scope of this paper, the resulting algorithm is 
easily described (for a description of EM and applications to filling in missing values, see 
[Dempster et al., 1977] and [Ghahramani & Jordan, 1994]): 
1. Build the models using only the labeled data (as in Section 2). 
2. Use the models to probabilistically label the unlabeled images. 
3. Using the images with the probabilistically assigned labels, and the 
images with the given labels, recalculate the models' parameters. As 
mentioned in section 2, for the images labeled by this process, 
P(Classcllmage ) is not restricted to {0,1}; the probability mass for an 
image may be spread to multiple classes. 
4. If a pre-specified termination condition is not met, go to step 2. 
This process is used for each classifier. The termination condition was five iterations; after 
five iterations, there was little change in the models' parameters. 
The performance of the three classifiers with unlabeled data is shown in Figure 3(right). 
Note that with small amounts of data, the performance of all of the classifiers improved 
dramatically when the unlabeled data is used. Figure 4 shows the percent improvement by 
using the unlabeled data to augment the labeled data. Note that the error is reduced by 
Probabilistic Modeling for Face Orientation Discrimination 859 
almost 90% with the use of unlabeled data (see the case with Dependency Trees with only 
4 labeled examples, in which the accuracy rates increase from 44% to 92.5%). With only 
50 labeled examples, a classification accuracy of 99% was obtained. This accuracy was 
obtained with almost an order of magnitude fewer labeled examples than required with 
classifiers which used only labeled examples. 
In almost every case examined, the addition of unlabeled data helped performance. How- 
ever, unlabeled data actually hurt the no-dependency model when a large amount of 
labeled data already existed. With large amounts of labeled data, the parameters of the 
model were estimated well. Incorporating unlabeled data may have hurt performance 
because the underlying generatire process modeled did not match the real generatire pro- 
cess. Therefore, the additional data provided may not have been labeled with the accuracy 
required to improve the model's classification performance. It is interesting to note that 
with the more complex models, such as the dependency trees or local dependence net- 
works, even with the same amount of labeled data, unlabeled data improved performance. 
[Nigam, et al., 1998] have reported similar performance degradation when using a large 
number of labeled examples and EM with a naive-Bayesian model to classify text docu- 
ments. They describe two methods for overcoming this problem. First, they adjust the rel- 
ative weight of the labeled and unlabeled data in the M-step by using cross-validation. 
Second, they providing multiple centroids per class, which improves the data/model fit. 
Although not presented here due to space limitations, the first method was attempted - it 
improved the performance on the face orientation discrimination task. 
Givel I LiMM:I sllp Glvel4 LMMad zimplm 
I I 
:ill 
Figure 4: Improvement for each model by using unlabeled data to augment the labeled data. Left: with 
only 1 labeled example, Middle: 4 labeled, Right: 50 labeled. The bars in light gray represent the 
performance with only labeled data, the dark bars indicate the performance with the unlabeled data. The 
number in parentheses indicates the absolute (in contrast to relative) percentage change in classification 
performance with the use of unlabeled data. 
4 Related Work 
There is a large amount of work which attempts to discover attributes of faces, including 
(but not limited to) face detection, face expression discrimination, face recognition, and 
face orientation discrimination (for example [Rowley et al., 1998] [Sung, 1996] [Bartlett & 
Sejnowski, 1997][Cottrell & Metcalfe, 1991][Turk & Pentland, 1991]). The work pre- 
sented in this paper demonstrates the effective incorporation of unlabeled data into image 
classification procedures; it should be possible to use unlabeled data in any of these tasks. 
The closest related work is presented in [Nigam et al, 1998]. They used naive-Bayes 
methods to classify text documents into a pre-specified number of groups. By using unla- 
beled data, they achieve significant classification performance improvement over using 
labeled documents alone. Other work which has employed EM for learning from labeled 
and unlabeled data include [Miller and Uyar, 1997] who used a mixture of experts classi- 
fier, and [Shahshahani & Landgrebe, 1994] who used a mixture of Gaussians. However, 
the dlmensionality of their input was at least an order of magnitude smaller than used here. 
There is a wealth of other related work, such as [Ghahramani & Jordan, 1994] who have 
860 S. Baluja 
used EM to fill in missing values in the training examples. In their work, class labels can 
be regarded as another feature value to fill-in. 
Other approaches to reducing the need for large amounts of labeled data take the form of 
active learning in which the learner can ask for the labels of particular examples. [Cohn, 
et. al 1996] [McCallurn & Nigam, 1998] provide good overviews of active learning. 
5 Conclusions & Future Work 
This paper has made two contributions. The first contribution is to solve the problem of 
discriminating between five face orientations with very little data. With only two labeled 
example images per class, we were able to obtain classification accuracies of 94% on sep- 
arate test sets (with the local dependence networks with 4 parents). With only a few more 
examples, this was increased to greater than 98% accuracy. This task has a range of appli- 
cations in the design of user-interfaces and user monitoring. 
We also explored the use of multiple probabilistic models with unlabeled data. The mod- 
els varied in their complexity, ranging from modeling no dependencies between pixels, to 
modeling four dependencies per pixel. While the no-dependency model performs well 
with very little labeled data, when given a large amount of labeled data, it is unable to 
match the performance of the other models presented. The Dependency-Tree models per- 
form the worst when given small amounts of data because they are most susceptible to 
finding spurious dependencies in the data. The local dependency models performed the 
best overall, both by working well with little data, and by being able to exploit more data, 
whether labeled or unlabeled. By using EM to incorporate unlabeled data into the training 
of the classifiers, we improved the performance of the classifiers by up to approximately 
90% when little labeled data was available. 
The use of unlabeled data is vital in this domain. It is time-consuming to hand label many 
images, but many unlabeled images are often readily available. Because many similar 
tasks, such as face recognition and facial expression discrimination, suffer from the same 
problem of limited labeled data, we hope to apply the methods described in this paper to 
these applications. Preliminary results on related recognition tasks have been promising. 
Acknowledgments 
Scott Davies helped tremendously with discussions about modeling dependencies. I would also like to acknowl- 
edge the help of Andrew McCallurn for discussions of EM, unlabeled data and the related work. Many thanks are 
given to Henry RowIcy who graciously provided the data set. Finally, thanks are given to Kaari Flagstad for 
comments on drafts of this paper. 
References 
Bartlett, M. & Sejnowski, T. (1997) "Viewpoint Invariant Face Recognition using ICA and Attractor Networks", 
in Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 9. 
Chow, C. & Liu, C. (1968)"Approximating Discrete Probability Distributions with Dependence Trees". IEEE- 
Transactions on Information Theory, 14: 462-467. 
Cohn, D.A., Ghahramani, Z. & Jordan, M. (1996) "Active Learning with Statistical Models", dournal of Artifi- 
cial Intelligence Research 4:129-145. 
Cottrell, G. & Metcalfe, (1991) "Face, Gender and Emotion Recognition using Holons", NIPS 3. 
Dempster, A. P., Laird, N.M., Rubin, D.B. (1977) "Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete Data via the EM 
Algorithm", d. Royal Statistical Society Series B, 39 1-38. 
Friedman, N., Geiger, D. Goldszmidt, M. (1997) "Bayesian Network Classifiers", Machine Learning 1:29. 
Ghahramani & Jordan (1994) "Supervised Learning from Incomplete Data Via an EM Approach" NIPS 6. 
McCallum, A. & Nigam, K. (1998) "Employing EM in Pool-Based Active Learning", in ICML98. 
Miller, D. & Uyar, H. (1997) "A Mixture of Experts Classifier with Learning based on both Labeled and Unla- 
beled data", in Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems 9. 
Nigam, K. McCallum, A., Thrun, S., Mitchell, T. (1998), "Learning to Classify Text from Labeled and Unla- 
beled Examples", to appear in AAAI-98. 
RowIcy, H., Baluja, S. & Kanade, T. (1998) "Neural Network-Based Face Detection", IEEE-Transactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI), Vol. 20, No. 1, January, 1998. 
Shahshahani, B. & Landgrebe, D. (1994) "The Effect of Unlabeled samples in reducing the small sample size 
problem and mitigating the Hughes Phenomenon", IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing 32. 
Sung, K.K. (1996), Learning and Example Selection for Object and Pattern Detection, Ph.D. Thesis, MIT AI 
Lab - AI Memo 1572. 
Turk, M. & Pentland, A. (1991) "Eigenfaces for Recognition". d. Cog Neurosci. 3 (1). 
