Call-based Fraud Detection in Mobile 
Communication Networks using a Hierarchical 
Regime-Switching Model 
Jaakko Hollm(n 
Helsinki University of Technology 
Lab. of Computer and Information Science 
P.O. Box 5400, 02015 HUT, Finland 
Jaakko.Hollmen@hut.fi 
Volker Tresp 
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology 
Dept. Information and Communications 
81730 Munich, Germany 
Volker. Treslmchp.siemens.de 
Abstract 
Fraud causes substantial losses to telecommunication carriers. Detec- 
tion systems which automatically detect illegal use of the network can be 
used to alleviate the problem. Previous approaches worked on features 
derived from the call patterns of individual users. In this paper we present 
a call-based detection system based on a hierarchical regime-switching 
model. The detection problem is formulated as an inference problem on 
the regime probabilities. Inference is implemented by applying the junc- 
tion tree algorithm to the underlying graphical model. The dynamics are 
learned from data using the EM algorithm and subsequent discriminative 
training. The methods are assessed using fraud data from a real mobile 
communication network. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Fraud is costly to a network carrier both in terms of lost income and wasted capacity. It has 
been estimated that the telecommunication industry looses approximately 2-5% of its total 
revenue to fraud. The true losses are expected to be even higher since telecommunication 
companies are reluctant to admit fraud in their systems. A fraudulent attack causes lots of 
inconveniences to the victimized subscriber which might motivate the subscriber to switch 
to a competing carrier. Furthermore, potential new customers would be very reluctant to 
switch to a carrier which is troubled with fraud. 
Mobile communication networks --which are the focus of this work-- are particularly 
appealing to fraudsters as the calling from the mobile terminal is not bound to a physical 
place and a subscription is easy to get. This provides means for an illegal high-profit 
business requiring minimal investment and relatively low risk of getting caught. Fraud is 
890 d. Hollmbn and V. Tresp 
usually initiated by a mobile phone theft, by cloning the mobile phone card or by acquiring 
a subscription with false identification. After intrusion the subscription can be used for 
gaining free services either for the intruder himself or for his illegal customers in form of 
call-selling. In the latter case, the fraudster sells calls to customers for reduced rates. 
The earliest means of detecting fraud were to register overlapping calls originating from 
one subscription, evidencing card cloning. While this procedure efficiently detects cloning, 
it misses a large share of other fraud cases. A more advanced system is a velocity trap which 
detects card cloning by using an upper speed limit at which a mobile phone user can travel. 
Subsequent calls from distant places provide evidence for card cloning. Although a velocity 
trap is a powerful method of detecting card cloning, it is ineffective against other types of 
fraud. Therefore there is great interest in detection systems which detect fraud based on 
an analysis of behavioral patterns (Barson et al., 1996, Burge et al., 1997, Fawcett and 
Provost, 1997, Taniguchi et al., 1998). 
In an absolute analysis, a user is classified as a fraudster based on features derived from 
daily statistics summarizing the call pattern such as the average number of calls. In a differ- 
ential analysis, the detection is based on measures describing the changes in those features 
capturing the transition from a normal use to fraud. Both approaches have the problem 
of finding efficient feature representations describing normal and fraudulent behavior. As 
they usually derive features as summary statistics over one day, they are plagued with a 
latency time of up to a day to detect fraudulent behavior. The resulting delay in detection 
can already lead to unacceptable losses and can be exploited by the fraudster. For these 
reasons real-time fraud detection is seen to be the most important development in fraud 
detection (Pequeno, 1997). 
In this paper we present a real-time fraud detection system which is based on a stochastic 
generative model. In the generative model we assume a variable victimized which indicates 
if the account has been victimized by a fraudster and a second variable fraud which indi- 
cates if the fraudster is currently performing fraud. Both variables are hidden. Furthermore, 
we have an observed variable call which indicates if a call being is performed or not. The 
transition probabilities from no-call to call and from call to no-call are dependent on the 
state of the variable fraud. Overall, we obtain a regime-switching time-series model as de- 
scribed by Hamilton (1994), with the modifications that first, the variables in the time series 
are not continuous but binary and second, the switching variable has a hierarchical struc- 
ture. The benefit of the hierarchical structure is that it allows us to model the time-series 
at different time scales. At the lowest hierarchical level, we model the dynamical behavior 
of the individual calls, at the next level the transition from normal behavior to fraudulent 
behavior and at the highest level the transition to being victimized. To be able to model a 
time-series at different temporal resolutions was also the reason for introducing a hierarchy 
into a hidden Markov model for Jordan, Ghahramani and Saul (1997). Fortunately, our 
hidden variables have only a small number of states such that we do not have to work with 
the approximation techniques those authors have introduced. 
Section 2 introduces our hierarchical regime-switching fraud model. The detection prob- 
lem is formulated as an inference problem on the regime probabilities based on subscriber 
data. We derive iterative algorithms for estimating the hidden variables fraud and victim- 
ized based on past and present data (filtering) or based on the complete set of observed 
data (smoothing). We present EM learning rules for learning the parameters in the model 
using observed data. We develop a gradient based approach for fine tuning the emission 
probabilities in the non-fraud state to enhance the discrimination capability of the model. 
In Section 3 we present experimental results. We show that a system which is fine-tuned on 
real data can be used for detecting fraudulent behavior on-line based on the call patterns. 
In Section 4 we present conclusions and discuss further applications and extensions of our 
fraud model. 
Fraud Detection Using a Hierarchical Regime-Switching Model 891 
2 THE HIERARCHICAL REGIME-SWITCHING FRAUD 
MODEL 
2.1 THE GENERATIVE MODEL 
The hierarchical regime-switching model consists of three variables which evolve in time 
stochastically according to first-order Markov chains. The first binary variable vt (victim- 
ized) is equal to one if the account is currently being victimized by a fraudster and zero 
otherwise. The states of this variable evolve according to the state transition probabili- 
ties piVj -- P(vt = ilvt- = j); i,j = 0, 1. The second binary variable st (fraud)is 
equal to one if the fraudster currently performs fraud and is equal to zero if the fraudster 
is inactive. The change between actively performing fraud and intermittent silence is typ- 
ical for a victimized account as is apparent from Figure 3. Note that this transient bursty 
behavior of a victimized account would be difficult to capture with a pure feature based 
approach. The states of this variable evolve following the state transition probabilities 
Pi%k = P(st = i]vt = j, st-i = k, );i,j, k = 0, 1. Finally, the binary variable Yt (call) 
is equal to one if the mobile phone is being used and zero otherwise with state transition 
matrix Pik = P(yt -- ilst - j, Yt- = k); i, j, k = O, 1. Note that this corresponds to the 
assumption of exponentially distributed call duration. Although not quite realistic, this is 
the general assumption in telecommunications. Typically, both the frequency of calls and 
the lengths of the calls are increased when fraud is executed. The joint probability of the 
time series up to time T is then 
T T T 
r(v, r(vo, yo)If 
P(vtlvt-) If P(stlvt'st-1) H P(Ytlst'yt-1) (1) 
t=l t=l t=l 
where in the experiments we used a sampling time of one minute. Furthermore, Vr = 
{vo,...,vr}, ST = {So,...,ST}, YT = {Yo,...,YT} and P(vo, so, Yo) is the prior dis- 
tribution of the initial states. 
Y Yt+ 
Figure 1: Dependency graph of the hierarchical regime-switching fraud model. The square 
boxes denote hidden variables and the circles observed variables. The hidden variable vt 
on the top describes whether the subscriber account is victimized by fraud. The hidden 
variable st indicates if fraud is currently being executed. The state of st determines the 
statistics of the variable call Yt. 
2.2 INFERENCE: FILTERING AND SMOOTHING 
When using the fraud detection system, we are interested to estimate the probability that 
an account is victimized or that fraud is currently occurring based on the call patterns up to 
the current point in time (filtering). We can calculate the probabilities of the states of the 
hidden variables by applying the following equations recursively with t - 1, ..., T. 
892 
P(vt - i, st_ = klYt_ ) = 
EPiP(vt 
l 
d. Hollmdn and V. Tresp 
-1 -- 1,$t-1 -' klYt-i) 
P(vt -- i,$t -- j]Yt-1) -- E p;ikP(vt '-- i,$t-1: klYt-1) 
Y P(vt = i, st - jlYt_l) 
P(vt : i, st = jlYt) -- c .py,;u,_ 
where c is a scaling factor. These equations can be derived from the junction tree algorithm 
for the Bayesian networks (Jensen, 1996). We obtain the probability of victimization and 
fraud by simple marginalization 
j i 
In some cases --in particular for the EM learning rules in the next section-- we might 
be interested in estimating the probabilities of the hidden states at some time in the past 
(smoothing). In this case we can use a variation of the smoothing equations described in 
Hamilton (1994) and Kim (1994). After performing the forward recursion, we can calculate 
the probability of the hidden states at time t  given data up to time T > t  iterating the 
following equations with t -- T, T - 1,..., 1. 
P(vt+i = k, st+ = llYT) P(vt+l -- k, st ---- jlY )p?u; 
P(vt+l : k, st = jIY,) = E P(vt+l -- k, St+l : /IYt) 
1 
 P(vt+: k, st: jlYr) P(vt: i, st _. 
k 
2.3 EM LEARNING RULES 
Parameter estimation in the regime-switching model is conveniently formulated as an in- 
complete data problem, which can be solved using the EM algorithm (Hamilton, 1994). 
Each iteration of the EM algorithm is guaranteed to increase the value of the marginal log- 
likelihood function until a fixed point is reached. This fixed point is a local optimum of the 
marginal log-likelihood function. 
In the M-step the model parameters are optimized using the estimates of the hidden states 
using the current parameter estimates. Let 0: {Pij, Pijk, Pikj} denote the current param- 
eter estimates. The new estimates are obtained using 
T JlYT;O) 
v Y"t=l P(vt -- i, vt-1 = 
Pij = 
T 
Y-t=l P(vt-1 = 
PiSk _ EtT_--i P(st : i, vt -- j,$t-1 -- 
EtT=I P(vt -- j, st_l --- ]ctyT; 0) 
EtT=-l,if yt:i andy_:j V( st-1 -- kIYT;O) 
Pikj = T 
Fraud Detection Using a Hierarchical Regime-Switching Model 893 
The E-step determines the probabilities on the right sides of the equations using the current 
parameter estimates. These can be determined using the smoothing equations from the 
previous section directly by marginalizing 
P(vt -- k, st -- 1, Vt+l = i, st+l = JIYT) 
v  
PikPjkl [ t = k, st = llYt ) 
= P(vt+ = i, st+: JlYr) P(Vt+l = i, st+: JlYt) 
where the terms on the right side are obtained from the equations in the last Section. 
2.4 DISCRIMINATIVE TRAINING 
In our data setting, it is not known when the fraudulent accounts were victimized by fraud. 
This is why we use the EM algorithm to learn the two regimes from data in an incom- 
plete data setting. We know, however, which accounts were victimized by fraud. After EM 
learning the discrimination ability of the model was not satisfactory. We therefore used 
the labeled sequences to improve the model. The reason for the poor performance was 
credited to unsuitable call emission probabilities in the normal state. We therefore mini- 
mize the error function E Y'i (maxt P(v? ) ]1'(i)) /(i))2 
- - with regard to the parameter 
Pio,j=o,k=o, where the t © --- {0, 1} is the label for the sequence i. The error function 
was minimized with Quasi-Newton procedure with numerical differentiation. 
3 EXPERIMENTS 
To test our approach we used a data set consisting of 600 accounts which were not affected 
by fraud and 304 accounts which were affected by fraud. The time period for non-fraud and 
fraud accounts were 49 and 92 days, respectively. We divided the data equally into training 
data and test data. From the non-fraud data we estimated the parameters describing the 
normal calling behavior, i.e. P,j=o,,' Next, we fixed the probability that an account is 
victimized from one time step to the next to P'=,j=o : 10-5 and the probability that 
a victimized account becomes de-victimized as P/-o,j-i '- 5 x 10 -4. Leaving those 
parameters fixed the remaining parameters were traiedsing the fraudulent accounts and 
the EM algorithm described in Section 2. We had to do unsupervised training since it was 
known by velocity check that the accounts were affected but it was not clear when the 
intrusion occurred. After unsupervised training, we further enhanced the discrimination 
capability of the system which helped us reduce the amount of false alarms. The final 
model parameters can be found in the Appendix. 
After training, the system was tested using the test data. Unfortunately, it is not known 
when the accounts were attacked by fraud, but only on per-account basis if an account was 
at some point a victim of fraud. Therefore, we declare an account to be victimized if the 
victimized variable at some point exceeds the threshold. Also, it is interesting to study the 
results shown in Figure 3. We show data and posterior time-evolving probabilities for an 
account which is known to be victimized. From the call pattern it is obvious that there are 
periods of suspiciously high traffic at which the probability of victimization is recognized 
to be very high. We also see that the variable fraud st follows the bursty behavior of 
the fraudulent behavior correctly. Note, that for smoothing which is important both for 
a retrospective analysis of call data and for learning, we achieve smoother curves for the 
victimized variable. 
894 J. Hollmdn and V. Desp 
Figure 2: The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves are shown for on-line detec- 
tion (left figure) and for retrospective classification (right figure). In the figures, detection 
probability is plotted against the false alarm probability. The dash-dotted lines are results 
before, the solid lines after discriminative training. We can see that the discriminative 
training improves the model considerably. 
After EM training and discriminative training, we tested the model both in on-line detec- 
tion mode (filtering) and in retrospective classification (smoothing) with smoothed proba- 
bilities. The detection results are shown in Figure 2. With a fixed false alarm probability 
of 0.003, the detection probabilities for the training set were found to be 0.974 and 0.934 
using on-line detection mode and with smoothed probabilities, respectively. With a testing 
set and a fixed false alarm probability of 0.020, we obtain the detection probabilities of 
0.928 and 0.921, for the on-line detection and for retrospective classification, respectively. 
4 CONCLUSIONS 
We presented a call-based on-line fraud detection system which is based on a hierarchi- 
cal regime-switching generafive model. The inference rules are obtained from the junction 
tree algorithm for the underlying graphical model. The model is trained using the EM algo- 
rithm in an incomplete data setting and is further refined with gradient-based discriminative 
training, which considerably improves the results. 
A few extensions are in the process of being implemented. First of all, it makes sense to 
use more than one fraud model for the different fraud scenarios and several user models 
to account for different user profiles. For these more complex models we might have to 
rely on approximations techniques such as the ones introduced by Jordan, Ghahramani and 
Saul (1997). 
Appendix 
The model parameters after EM training and discriminative training. Note that entering the 
fraud state without first entering the victimized state is impossible. 
0.9559 
P,j=o,k = 0.3533 
1.0000 
P,=o,k = 0.0000 
0.0441) pV (0.9292 0.0708) 
0.6467 i,j=,t, = 0.0570 0.9430 
0.0000 )  (0.9979 0.0021) 
1.0000 Pi,j=,, = 0.0086 0.9914 
Fraud Detection Using a Hierarchical Regime-Switching Model 895 
0.5 
0 
0.5 I 1.5 2 2.5 
I I I [ 
0.5 I 1.5 2 2.5 
0.5 I 1.5 2 2.5 
I I [ I 
0.5 I 1.5 2 2.5 
J '  I ! 
0.5 I 1.5 2 2.5 
X 10 4 
Figure 3: The first line shows the calling data yt from a victimized account. The second 
and third lines show the states of the victimized and fraud variables, respectively. Both are 
calculated with the filtering equations. The fourth and fifth lines show the same variables 
using the smoothing equations. The displayed time window period is seventeen days. 
References 
Barson P., Field, S., Davey, N., McAskie, G., and Frank, R. (1996). The Detection of Fraud 
in Mobile Phone Networks. Neural Network WorM, Vol. 6, No. 4. 
Bengio, Y. (1996). Markovian Models for Sequential Data. Technical Report # 1049, 
Universitd de Montreal. 
Burge, P., Shawe-Taylor J., Moreau Y., Verrelst, H., St6rmann C. and Gosset, P. (1997). 
BRUTUS - A Hybrid Detection Tool. Proc. of ACTS Mobile Telecommunications Summit, 
Aalborg, Denmark. 
Fawcett, T. and Provost, F. (1997). Adaptive Fraud Detection. Journal of Data Mining and 
Knowledge Discovery,, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 1-28. 
Hamilton, J. D. (1994). Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press. 
Jensen, Finn V. (1996). Introduction to Bayesian Networks. UCL Press. 
Jordan, M. I, Ghahramani, Z. and Saul, L. K. (1997). Hidden Markov Decision Trees, in 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems: Proceedings of the 1996 Conference 
(NIPS'9), MIT-Press, pp. 501-507. 
Kim, C.-J. (1994). Dynamical linear models with Markov-switching. Journal of Econo- 
metrics, Vol. 60, pp. 1-22. 
Pequeno, K. A.(1997). Real-Time fraud detection: Telecom's next big step. Telecommuni- 
cations (America Edition), Vol. 31, No. 5, pp. 59-60. 
Taniguchi, M., Haft, M., Hollmn, J. and Tresp, V. (1998). Fraud detection in communica- 
tions networks using neural and probabilistic methods. Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE Int. 
Conf in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP'98), Vol. 2, pp. 1241-1244. 
