Optimizing admission control while ensuring 
quality of service in multimedia networks via 
reinforcement learning* 
Timothy X Brown t, Hui Tong t, Satinder Singh 
- Electrical and Computer Engineering 
$ Computer Science 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, CO 80309-0425 
{timxb, tonh, baveja}@colorado.edu 
Abstract 
This paper examines the application of reinforcement learning to a 
telecommunications networking problem. The problem requires that rev- 
enue be maximized while simultaneously meeting a quality of service 
constraint that forbids entry into certain states. We present a general 
solution to this multi-criteria problem that is able to earn significantly 
higher revenues than alternatives. 
1 Introduction 
A number of researchers have recently explored the application of reinforcement learning 
(RL) to resource allocation and admission control problems in telecommunications. e.g., 
channel allocation in wireless systems, network routing, and admission control in telecom- 
munication networks [1, 6, 7, 8]. Telecom problems are attractive applications for RL 
research because good, simple to implement, simulation models exist for them in the en- 
gineering literature that are both widely used and results on which are trusted, because 
there are existing solutions to compare with, because small improvements over existing 
methods can lead to significant savings in the long run, because they have discrete states, 
and because there are many potential commercial applications. However, existing RL ap- 
plications have ignored an issue of great practical importance to telecom engineers, that 
of ensuring quali.ty of service (QoS) while simultaneously optimizing whatever resource 
allocation performance criterion is of interest. 
This paper will focus on admission control for broadband multimedia communication net- 
works. These networks are unlike the current internet in that voice, video, and data calls 
arrive and depart over time and, in exchange for giving QoS guarantees to customers, the 
network collects revenue for calls that it accepts into the network. In this environment, ad- 
mission control decides what calls to accept into the network so as to maximize the earned 
revenue while meeting the QoS guarantees of all carried customers. 
*Timothy Brown and Hui Tong were funded by NSF CAREER Award NCR-9624791. Satinder 
Singh was funded by NSF grant IIS-9711753. 
Optimizing Admission Control via RL 983 
Meeting QoS requires a decision function that decides when adding a new call will violate 
QoS guarantees. Given the diverse nature of voice, video, and data traffic, and their often 
complex underlying statistics, finding good QoS decision functions has been the subject 
of intense research [2, 5]. Recent results have emphasized that robust and efficient QoS 
decision functions require on-line adaptive methods [3]. 
Given we have a QoS decision function, deciding which of the heterogeneous arriving calls 
to accept and which to reject in order to maximize revenue can be framed as a dynamic 
program problem. The rapid growth in the number of states with problem complexity has 
led to reinforcement learning approaches to the problem [6]. 
In this paper we consider the problem of finding a control policy that simultaneously meets 
QoS guarantees and maximizes the network's earned revenue. We show that the straightfor- 
ward approach of mixing positive rewards for revenue with negative rewards for violating 
QoS leads to sub-optimal policies. Ideally we would like to find the optimal policy from 
the subset of policies that never violate the QoS constraint. But there is no a priori useful 
way to characterize the space of policies that don't violate the QoS constraint. We present 
a general approach to meeting such multicriteria that solves this problem and potentially 
many other applications. Experiments show that incorporating QoS and RL yield signifi- 
cant gains over some alternative heuristics. 
2 Problem Description 
This section describes the admission control problem model that will be used. To em- 
phasize the main features of the problem, networking issues such as queueing that are not 
essential have been simplified or eliminated. It should be emphasized that these aspects 
can readily be incorporated back into the problem. 
We focus on a single network link. Users attempt to access the link over time and the 
network immediately chooses to accept or reject the call. If accepted, the call generates 
traffic in terms of bandwidth as a function of time. At a later time, the call terminates and 
departs from the network. For each call accepted, the network receives revenue at a fixed 
rate over the duration of the call. The network measures QoS metrics such as transmission 
delays or packet loss rates and compares them against the guarantees given to the calls. 
Thus, the problem is described by the call arrival, traffic, and departure processes; the 
revenue rates; QoS metrics; QoS constraints; and link model. The choices used in this 
paper are given in the next paragraph. 
Calls are divided into discrete classes indexed by i. The calls are generated via a Poisson 
arrival process (arrival rate hi) and exponential holding times (mean holding time 1/ti). 
Within a call the bandwidth is an Or/OFF process where the traffic is either ON at rate ri or 
OFF at rate zero with mean holding times ,N, and ,. The effective immediate revenue 
are c. The link has a fixed bandwidth B. The total bandwidth used by accepted calls varies 
over time. The QoS metric is the fraction of time that the total bandwidth exceeds the link 
bandwidth (i.e. the overload probability, p). The QoS guarantee is an upper limit, p*. 
In previous work each call had' a constant bandwidth over time so that the effect on QoS 
was predictable. Variable rate traffic is safely approximated by assuming that it always 
transmits at its maximum or peak rate. Such so-called peak rate allocation under-utilizes 
the network; in some cases by orders of magnitude less than what is possible. Stochastic 
traffic rates in real traffic, the desire for high network utilization/revenue, and the resulting 
potential for QoS violations distinguish the problem in this paper. 
3 Semi-Markov Decision Processes 
At any given point of time, the system is in a particular configuration, :c, defined by the 
number of each type of ongoing calls. At random times a call arrival or a call termination 
984 T. X. Brown, H. Tong and S. Singh 
event, e, can occur. The configuration and event together determine the state of the sys- 
tem, s = (x, e). When an event occurs, the learner has to choose an action feasible for 
that event. The choice of action, the event, and the configuration deterministically define 
the next configuration and the payoff received by the learner. Then after an interval the 
next event occurs, and this cycle repeats. The task of the learner is to determine a pol- 
icy that maximizes the discounted sum of payoffs over an infinite horizon. Such a system 
constitutes a finite state, finite action, semi-Markov decision process (SMDP). 
3.1 Multi-criteria Objective 
The admission control objective is to learn a policy that assigns an accept or reject decision 
to each possible state of the system so as to maximize 
J = E ?tc(t)dt , 
where E{-} is the expectation operator, c(t) is the total revenue rate of ongoing calls at 
time t, and 3'  (0, 1) is a discount factor that makes immediate profit more valuable than 
future profit.  
In this paper we restrict the maximization to policies that never enter states that violate QoS 
guarantees. In general SMDP, due to stochastic state transitions, meeting such constraints 
may not be possible (e.g. from any state no matter what actions are taken there is a pos- 
sibility of entering restricted states). In this problem service quality decreases with more 
calls in the system and adding calls is strictly controlled by the admission controller so that 
meeting this QoS constraint is possible. 
3.2 Q-learning 
RL methods solve SMDP problems by learning good approximations to the optimal value 
function, J*, given by the solution to the Bellman optimality equation which takes the 
following form for the dynamic call admission problem: 
J*(s) = max [Ezxt,s,{c(s,a, At)+f(At)J*(s')} ] (1) 
aA(s) 
where A(s) is the set of actions available in the current state s, At is the random time 
until the next event, c(s, a, At) is the effective immediate payoff with the discounting, and 
,(At) is the effective discount for the next state s . 
We learn an approximation to J* using Watkin's Q-learning algorithm. To focus on the 
dynamics of this papefts problem and not on the confounding dynamics of function ap- 
proximation, the problem state space is kept small enough so that table lookup can be used. 
Bellman's equation can be rewritten in Q-values as 
J*(s) = max Q*(s,a) (2) 
aGA(s) 
Call Arrival: When a call arrives, the Q-value of accepting the call and the Q-value of 
rejecting the call is determined. If rejection has the highel' value, we drop the call. Else, if 
acceptance has the highel- value, we accept the call. 
Call Termination: No action needs to be taken. 
Whatever out' decision, we update our value function as follows: on a transition from state 
s to s' on action a in time At, 
Q(s,a) = (1- ()Q(s,a) +( (c(s,a, At) + 3,(At) max Q(s' b)) (3) 
bA(s')  
1Since we will compare policies based on total reward rather than discounted sum of reward, we 
can use the Tauberian approximation [4], i.e., 7 is chosen to be sufficiently close to 1. 
Optimizing ldmission Control via RL 985 
where ct C [0, 1] is the learning rate. 
In order for Q-learning to perform well, all potentially important state-action pairs (s, a) 
must be explored. At each state, with probability e we apply an action that will lead to a 
less visited configuration, instead of the action recommended by the Q-value. However, to 
update Q-values we still use the action b recommended by the Q-learning. 
4 Combining Revenue and Quality of Service 
The primary question addressed in this paper is how to combine the QoS constraint 
with the objective of maximizing revenue within this constraint. Let p(s,a, At) and 
q(s, a, At) be the revenue and measured QoS components of the reward, c(s, a, At). Ide- 
ally c(s, a, At) = p(s, a, At) when the QoS constraint is met and c(s, a, .._/Xt) = -Large 
(where -Large is any large negative value) when QoS is not met. If the QoS parameters 
could be accurately measured between each state transition then this approach would be a 
valid solution to the problem. In network systems, the QoS metrics contain a high-degree 
of variability. For example, overload probabilities can be much smaller than 10 -3 while 
the interarrival periods can be only a few ON/OFF cycles so that except for states with the 
most egregious QoS violations, most interarrival periods will have no overloads. 
If the reward is a general function of revenue and QoS: 
c(s,a, At) = f(p(s,a, At),q(s,a, At)), (4) 
sufficient and necessary condition for inducing optimal policy with the QoS constraint is 
given by: 
E{p(s,a, At)} ifE{q(s,a, At)} <p* 
E{f(p(s,a, At),q(s,a, At))} = -Large otherwise (5) 
For f(.) satisfying this condition, states that violate QoS will be highly penalized and never 
visited. The actions for states that are visited will be based solely on revenue. 
The Appendix gives a simple example showing that finding a f(.) that yields the optimal 
policy is unlikely without significant prior knowledge about each state. Several attempts at 
using (4) to combine QoS and revenue into the reward either violated QoS or had signifi- 
cantly lower toward. 
A straight-forward alternative exists to meeting the multicriteria formulated as follows. 
For each criteria, j, we estimate a separate set of Q-factors, QJ (s, a). Each is updated via 
on-line Q-learning. These are then combined post facto at the time of decision via some 
function Q(-) so that: 
Q(s,a) = Q({Qi(s,a)}). (6) 
For example in this paper the two criteria are estimated separately as Q' and Qq and 
O"(s,a) ifOq(s,a) <p* 
Q(s,a) = -Large otherwise 
(7) 
The structure of this problem allows us to estimate Qq without using (3). As stated, the 
QoS is an intrinsic property of a state and not of future states so it is independent of the 
policy. This allows us to collect QoS statistics about each state and treat them in a principled 
way (e.g. computing confidence intervals on the estimates). Using these QoS estimates, 
the set of allowable states contracts monotonically over time eventually converging to a 
fixed set of allowable states. Since the QoS constraint is guaranteed to reach a fixed point 
asymptotically, the Q-learned policy also approaches a fixed point at the optimal policy via 
standard Q-learning proofs. A related scheme is analyzed in [4] suggesting that similar 
cases will also converge to optimal policies. 
986 T. X. Brown, H. Tong and S. Singh 
Many other QoS criteria do depend on the policy and require using (3). A constraint on the 
expected overload probability with a given policy is an example. 
5 Simulation Results 
The experiment uses the following model. The total bandwidth is normalized to 1.0 unit of 
traffic per unit time. The target overflow probability is p* = 10 -3. Two source types are 
considered with the properties shown in Table 1. As noted before, call holding times are 
exponential and the arrivals are Poisson. For the first experiment, the ON/OFF holding times 
are exponentially distributed, while for the second experiment, they are Pareto distributed. 
The Pareto distribution is considered to be a more accurate representation of data traffic. 
Table 1: Experimental parameters 
Source Type 
Parameter I H 
ON rate, r 0.08 0.2 
Mean ON period, 1/v øN 5 5 
Mean OFF period, 1Iv © 15 45 
Hyperbolic exponent, u + 1 2.08 2.12 
Call arrival rate, ,X 0.067 0.2 
Call holding time, 1// 60 60 
Immediate payoff, c 5 1 
In the experiments, for each state-action pair, (s, a), QP(s, a) is updated using (3). As 
stated, in this case the update of Qq(s, a) does not need to use (3). Since random explo- 
ration is employed to ensure that all potentially important state-action pairs be tried, it nat- 
urally enables us to collect statistics that can be used to estimate QoS at these state-action 
pairs, Qq(s, a). As the number of visits to each state-action pair increases, the estimated 
Qq(s, a) becomes more and more accurate and, with confidence, we can gradually elimi- 
nate those state-action pairs that will violate QoS requirement. As a consequence, QP(s, a) 
is updated in a gradually correct subset of state-action space in the sense that QoS is met 
for any action within this subspace. Initial Q-values for RL are artificially set such that 
Q-learning started with the greedy policy (the greedy policy always accepts). 
After training is completed, we apply a test data set to compare the policy obtained through 
RL with alternative heuristic policies. The final QoS measurements obtained at the end of 
the RL training while learning QoS are used for testing different policies. To test the RL 
policies, when there is a new call arrival, the algorithm first determines if accepting this 
call will violate QoS. If it will, the call is rejected, else the action is chosen according to 
a: argmaxA(s) Q(s,a), where A(s) -- { l=accept, 0=reject}. For the moS constraint 
we use three cases: Peak rate allocation; Statistical multiplexing function learned on-line, 
denoted QoS learned; Given statistical multiplexing function a priori, denoted QoS given. 
We examine six different cases: (I) RL: QoS given; (2) RL: QoS learned; (3) RL: peak 
rate; (4) A heuristic that only accepts calls fi'om the most valuable class, i.e., type I, with 
given QoS; (5) Greedy: QoS given; (6) Greedy: peak rate. 
From the results shown in Fig. 1, it is clear that simultaneously doing Q-learning and 
QoS learning converges correctly to the RL policy obtained by giving the QoS a priori and 
doing standard Q-learning only. We see significant gains (about 15%) due to statistical 
multiplexing: (6) vs (5), and (3) vs (1). The gains due to RL are about 25%: (6) vs (3), 
and (5) vs (2). Together they yield about 45% increase in revenue over conservative peak 
rate allocation in this example. It is also clear from the figure that the RL policies perform 
better than the heuristic policies. Fig. (2) shows the rejection ratios for different policies. 
Optimizing Admission Control via RL 987 
13 
12 
06 
O5 
Compamon of derent policies, experiential ON/OFF 
1 
0 0 0 '3 - 0 0 '- 0 
4 
6 
2 4 6 8 1 1 14 
training time steps(x 10 6) 
1 .RL: QoS given 
2.RL: QoS learned 
3.RL: peak rate 
4 Greedy, type I only 
5.Greedy' QoS given 
6.Greedy' peak rate 
1-Greedy peak tale, 2-RL peak rate, 3-Greedy QoS ge/er, 4-RL QoS learned, expoenlal ONFF 
1 2 3 4 
Figure 1: Comparison of total rewards of 
RL while learning QoS, RL with given 
QoS measurements, RL with peak rate, 
greedy policies and peak rate allocation, 
normalized by the greedy total reward - 
exponential ON/OFF. 
Figure 2: Comparison of rejection ratios 
for the policies learned in Fig. 1. 
We repeat the above experiments with Pareto distributed ON and OFF periods, using the 
same parameters listed in Table 1. The results are shown in Figs. 3-4. Clearly, the different 
ON/OFF distributions yield similar gains for RL. 
6 Conclusion 
This paper shows that a QoS constraint could be incorporated into a RL solution to max- 
imizing a network's revenue, using a vector value Q-learning function. The formulation 
is quite general and can be applied to many possible constraints. The approach, when ap- 
plied to a simple networking problem, increases revenue by up to 45%. Future research 
includes: using neural networks or other function approximators to deal with more com- 
plex problems for which lookup tables are infeasible; and extending admission control to 
multi-link routing. 
7 Appendix: Simple One-State Example 
A simple example will show that a function with property (5) is unlikely. Consider a link 
that can accept only one type of call and it can accept no more than one call. With no actions 
possible when carrying a call there is only one state. Only two rewards are possible, c(/) 
for reject and c(A) for accept. To fix the value function let c(/) - 0 and let p and q be 
the random revenues and QoS experienced. Analysis of (1) and (2) shows that the accept 
action will be chosen if and only if E{f(p,q)} > O. 
In this example, the revenues are random and possibly negative (e.g. if they are net after 
cost of billing and transport). The call should be accepted if E{p} > 0 and E{q} < p*. 
Therefore the correct reward function has the property: 
E{f(p,q)} >0 ifE{p} > 0andE{q} <p* (8) 
The point of the example is that an f(.) satisfying (8) requires prior knowledge about the 
distributions of the revenue and the QoS as a function of the state. Even if it were possible 
988 T. X. Brown, H. Tong and S. Singh 
Companson of different policies, Pareto ON/OFF 
/ 
1 
1-Gre'y peak rate, 2-GreeW" QoS gwe, 3-RL QoS learned, Pareto ON/OFF 
07 
06 
05 
0 2 4 
- - - RL: QoS learned 
Greedy: QoS given 
Greedy: peak rate 
12 14 
6 8 10 
Irmnmg time stepe(x 106} 
1( 0 
1 2 3 
Figure 3: Comparison of total rewards of 
RL while learning QoS, greedy policy and 
peak rate allocation, normalized by the 
greedy total reward - Pareto ON/OFF. 
Figure 4: Comparison of rejection ratios 
for the policies learned in Fig. 3. 
for this example, setting up constraints such as (8) for a real problem with a huge state 
space would be non-trivial because p and q are functions of the many state and action pairs. 
References 
[1] Boyan, J.A., Littman, M.L., "Packet routing in dynamically changing networks: a 
reinforcement learning approach," in Cowan, J.D., et al., ed. Advances in NIPS 6, 
Morgan Kauffman, SF, 1994. pp. 671-678. 
[2] Brown, T.X, "Adaptive Access Control Applied to Ethernet Data," Advances in NIPS 
9, ed. M. Mozer et al., MIT Press, 1997. pp. 932-938. 
[3] Brown, T.X, "Adaptive Statistical Multiplexing for Broadband Communications," In- 
vited Tutorial Fifth IFIP Workshop on Performance Modeling & Evaluation of ATM 
Networks, Ilkley, U.K., July, 1997. 
[4] Gabor, Z., Kalmar, Z., Szepesvari, C., "Multi-criteria Reinforcement Learning," to 
appear in International Conference on Machine Learning, Madison, WI, July, 1998. 
[5] Hiramatsu, A., "ATM Communications Network Control by eural Networks," IEEE 
T. on NeuralNetworks, v. 1, n. 1, pp. 122-130, 1990. 
[6] Marbach, P., Mihatsch, O., Schulte, M., Tsitsiklis, J.N., "Reinforcement learning for 
call admission control and routing in integrated service networks," in Jordan, M., et 
al., ed. Advances in NIPS 10, MIT Press, 1998. 
[7] Nie, J., Haykin, S., "A Q-learning based dynamic channel assignment technique for 
mobile communication systems," to appear in IEEE T. on Vehicular Technology. 
[8] Singh, S.P., Bertsekas, D.P., "Reinforcement learning for dynamic channel allocation 
in cellular telephone systems," in Advances in NIPS 9, ed. Mozer, M., et al., MIT 
Press, 1997. pp. 974-980. 
